

                                                             APPENDIX 22 
                                                             28 November 1988
                                  WINDVANES

Principles of Operation

The windvanes are potentiometers with circular resistance tracks.  Only the
centre part of the tracks are used, ñ10o about centre, which give signals of
between ± 400mV.  The signals enter JB4A, they then enter the signal
conditioning box where the sensor output voltages are converted to a range of
+1 to -1 Volts.  The voltage outputs from the signal conditioning box then
enter the A-D board which convert them to DRS units which are then recorded on
the DRS as parameters 18 and 19, angle of attack and angle of sideslip
respectively.  The software converts the voltage outputs to degrees or radians
using 3LC equations.

The torque of the windvanes is measured before flight since 'free' movement of
the potentiometer arm is required.  A torque of up to 4g/m3 is acceptable,
above this the windvanes have a tendency to stick.  A torque which is very low
can lead to flutter, (oscillation at very high frequency) which can lead to
wear on the track.  Flutter can be overcome in fight by changing the airspeed
or attitude.

Pre-Flight

1.   Check windvanes clean, undamaged and movement free
2.   Measure the torque of both windvanes
3.   Check movement of each windvane on the DRS (with Flight Leader)
4.   Remove windvane cover and stow in aircraft.

In-Flight

1.   The Flight Leader should check the signals regularly for signs of icing
     or flutter.

Post-Flight

1.   Check windvanes clean, undamaged and movement free
2.   After low level flights over the sea, spray the windvanes with distilled
     water followed by methylated spirit to clear any salt deposits.  In
     winter use meths. only.

3.   The windvane cover must be in place whenever the aircraft is on the
     ground to protect them from damage.











                                     -1-

