
                                                                 APPENDIX 19
                                                             31 October 1991

                          GENERAL EASTERN HYGROMETER

Circuit Breakers Required

Forward Bulkhead: MRF Main Distribution Panel
                  a) 28 V JB4B supply
                  b) 115V JB4B supply
                  c) 200 V JB4B supply
             Van: a) JB4B 28V DC Cambridge Hygro
                  b) JB4B Cambridge Hygro 1A fuse

PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION

The incoming air sample enters the dew point hygrometer chamber and passes
over a mirror surface.  When the mirror surface is dry and at ambient
temperature the light emanating from the solid state source is reflected by
the mirror to the direct photoresistor and a portion of the light is detected
by the bias photoresistor.  The photoresistors feed the power output circuit
causing current to flow to the cooling module of the mirror.  The mirror
temperature cools to a point where condensation occurs on the mirror surface. 
As condensation occurs, the light reflected to the direct photoresistor is
scattered and therefore reduced in intensity, while the light available to the
bias photoresistor increases.  This unbalance is detected by the control
amplifier resulting in a decrease of cooling and subsequent increase in mirror
temperature.  When the dew on the mirror is of constant thickness it is in
equilibrium with the partial pressure of the water vapour in the air sample. 
At this time the temperature of the mirror is the dew point temperature,
measured by the precision platinum resistance thermometer embedded in the
mirror.  At temperatures below 0 Deg C. the condensate on the surface of the
mirror is in the form of ice and therefore the temperature of the surface is
interpreted as the frost point temperature.

The signal output from the sensor enters the digital panel meter in the
display unit where it is converted to BCD, the signal is then output to a
digital latch card in the DRS where the data is read and recorded as
parameter 58.

The current to the cooling module is monitored by a circuit which flags the
data if excessive heating or cooling occurs indicated by the current being
outside its normal working range.  This control current signal is recorded on
the DRS as parameter 59.  Its present working range (as from 29.11.90) is 695
to 900 DRS units.

When the data is flagged the relay in the display unit is set high which
outputs a signal to set the relay in JB4A high.  The control condition light
is switched on by the display unit relay and the output from the JB4A relay
sets the 24 bit of the signal register to 1 on a digital latch in the DRS. 
Which is then read and recorded as parameter 27.





                                        -1-


                                                                 APPENDIX 19
                                                             31 October 1991
PRE-FLIGHT

1.   Check that the connector is made in the forward cargo hold (starboard
     side.
2.   Switch to DEW POINT and check Display Unit function.
3.   After allowing a 15 minute warm-up, switch function switch to ZERO, CHECK
     DIGITAL METER READS +00.0.
4.   Set the function switch to `BAL' (balance) - the indicated mirror
     temperature will rise and the meter needle will swing to the left.  When
     the meter indication is stable, adjust the balance control until the
     needle is on the LEFT dot.
5.   Return the switch to DEW POINT
6.   Check Dew Point/I.A.T. in correct relationship
7.   Check that the G.E. control condition (DRS parameter 59) is not zero. 
IN-FLIGHT

1.   On the HORACE Numeric Dump (ie default) screen, the General Eastern
     reading is displayed.  If an `out-of-control' condition exists, a red `c'
     will appear alongside the reading.

POST FLIGHT

1.   After power change over, switch General Eastern Display Unit OFF.
2.   Check General Eastern Intake is clean and undamaged.
3.   After low level flights over the sea spray with distilled water followed
     by methylated spirit to clear any salt deposits.  During winter use 
     METHS. ONLY.

























                                        -2-

                                                                       
