

                                                                APPENDIX 12
                                                                1 October 1984
                         AIR SAMPLING BOOM (General)

See separate appendices for individual booms.

Pre-Flight

1.   If not fitted, locate winding handle (stowed on RACK 2) and fit to stub,
     insert pip-pin.  Stow dummy on RACK 2.
2.   Ensure both control levers set to loading position.
3.   Loosen thumbscrew latch and open inboard door.
4.   Loosen two latches, push lock pin to the left and open top hatch.
5.   Pull out locking pin in winding handle.
6.   Insert the boom into the cylinder and guide the spigots on the carrier
     into the carriage assembly.
7.   Fit the carrier pin and wire lock in position.
8.   Reset the locking pin in the winding handle.
9.   Check boom head correctly aligned and wire locked.
10.  Make and secure electrical, air and vacuum connections as necessary.
11.  ENSURE NO LOOSE ARTICLES REMAIN INSIDE CYLINDER.
12.  Push lock pin fully left, shut and secure top hatch.
13.  Close the inboard door and secure with thumbscrew.
14.  Push RED lever to the operating position.
15.  Push GREEN lever to the operating position.  Check that latch engages so
     that lever is locked.
16.  Check no obstructions outside.

To Extend Boom:
17.  Pull out handle locking pin, wind handle clockwise ~ 6 turns.  When
     handle has stopped in 3 o'clock position engage locking pin and check
     handle is locked.

To Retract Boom:

18.  Pull out handle locking pin, wind handle anticlockwise ~ 6 turns, when
     handle has stopped in 6 o'clock position engage locking pin and check
     handle is locked.

19.  Press latch down and set GREEN lever to inboard position.

20.  Set RED lever to inboard position.

21.  Check externally that outer door is closed.

In Flight

Obtain clearance from the Aircraft Captain (via Flight Leader) before
extending the boom.






                                        -1-


                                                                APPENDIX 12
                                                                1 October 1984
To Extend Boom
1.   Push RED lever to operating position.

2.   Push GREEN lever to operating position, check locked.

3.   Pull out locking pin, turn handle clockwise ~ 6 turns and lock in
     3 o'clock position with boom fully extended.

To Retract Boom
1.   Pull out locking pin, turn handle anticlockwise ~ 6 turns and lock in
     6 o'clock position.

2.   Press latch down and set GREEN lever to inboard position.

3.   Set RED lever to inboard position.

TO CHANGE BOOM IN FLIGHT

To Remove Boom From Cylinder

1.   Ensure boom retracted and outer door locked.

2.   Switch OFF all electrical, air and vacuum supplies to the boom.

3.   Open inboard door and top hatch.

4.   Disconnect electrical, air and vacuum connectors.

5.   Pull out locking pin on winding handle.

6.   Remove carrier pin securing boom to carriage and extract boom through
     inboard door.

7.   If no replacement is to be fitted ensure all loose articles removed,
     close top hatch, inboard door and lock handle in 6 o'clock position.

To Refit Boom

1.   With inboard door and top hatch open and winding handle unlocked insert
     boom into the cylinder.  Guide the spigots on the carrier into the
     carriage assembly.

2.   Fit the carrier pin and wire lock in position.

3.   Make and secure electrical, air and vacuum connections.

4.   Check boom head correctly aligned and wire locked.

5.   ENSURE NO LOOSE ARTICLES REMAIN INSIDE CYLINDER AND BOOM IS SECURED TO
     THE CARRIAGE.

6.   Close top hatch and inboard door and lock handle in 6 o'clock position.

                                        -2-
                                                                  
