
                                                             APPENDIX 13
                                                             12 December 1989
                                Refractometer

Circuit Breakers Required

1.   Co-Pilot's MRF DC circuit breaker panel - MRF MAIN & ESS DC BUS
          a)   MRF Power Control
2.   Co-Pilot's upper circuit breaker panel - MRF AC BUS
          a)   MRF power - Phase A
          b)             - Phase B
          c)             - Phase C
3.   Cargo hold forward bulkhead - MRF MAIN DISTRIBUTION PANEL
          a)   200V AC - Converter power unit supply
          b)   230V AC - JB4B supply
4.   Recorder Van, rear compartment - JB4B
          a)   230V AC - 1 Amp Fuse - Refractometer

Principles of Operation

The air being sampled is passed through a gold-plated invar cavity on the
boom, which has a resonant frequency of about 9540 MHz, depending on the
refractive index of the air within it.  The refractive index depends upon the
air temperature, pressure and humidity, the first two parameters are already
measured, thus the humidity can be determined from measurements of the
resonant frequency.

The cavity resonance is electronically represented by a pulse, known as the
A pulse.  A reference pulse, fixed in time, known as the B pulse, is generated
in the Oscillator Unit.  The separation between these pulses varies with
changes in refractive index, and is measured in microseconds.  This
measurement is converted to a form suitable for analogue display on the
Control Unit and recording on the DRS.

The Power Unit located on Rack 2 provides ñ 24 volts, from the frequency
converters' 230V 50Hz supply, to power the Oscillator Unit.  Two blue lamps
indicate the presence of the output voltages.  The Oscillator Unit is attached
to the inboard end of the refractometer boom in the air sampling boom
compartment.  The Control Unit, located on the centre console in the van,
interfaces signals from the Oscillator Unit to provide analogue meter readings
and digital output to the DRS.

The Power Unit must be switched ON BEFORE the frequency converters' 230V 50Hz
power ON switch which supplies power to the measuring circuits.

The O/P (output) ON switch, on the Control Unit, provides power to drive the
digital channel parameter 38 on the DRS, which is independent of any other
controls described below, and takes at least 30 minutes to stabilise.

The left-hand analogue meter on the Control Unit has two functions controlled
by the switch below it:-  In the MEASURE position (up) the meter displays the
analogue pulse separation on a coarse scale from 0 to 100æs.  In the MONITOR



                                        -1-


                                                              APPENDIX 13
                                                              12 December 1989     
                                                        
position (down) the meter monitors the positions of the A or B pulse, as
selected by the switch below it.  Units are taken as a percentage of full
scale, 0 to 100%.  The A pulse will vary with changes in the air whilst the B
pulse remains steady, being the reference.  The B pulse is normally less than
the A pulse.  A slow drift of the B pulse does occur with time, and
temperature changes in the Oscillator Unit should be kept between 25 and 85%.

The right-hand meter provides a fine display of the analogue pulse separation
with two sensitivities selected by the switch below it:-
     HIGH :  gives 15æs full scale (bottom scale on meter)
     LOW  :  gives 50æs full scale (top scale on meter)
A reading of pulse separation may easily be taken by adding the reading on the
clock potentiometer to the right-hand meter reading.  Thus the maximum value
that can be read is 150æs, (when the left-hand meter will be off scale). 
Note:  Before the O/P switch has been on long enough to stabilise (>« hr) it
is impossible to get the meter to read above « full scale.

The circular temperature meter indicates the temperature inside the Oscillator
Unit, having a range of 25 to 35 Deg C.

The signal from the Oscillator Unit enters the Digital Junction Box where a
1Hz pulse is generated to synchronise the timing with the DRS.  This signal
then enters the Control Unit which outputs the signal as an analogue display,
the signal is also output back to the Digital Junction Box.  The output signal
from the Digital Junction Box enters a digital latch card in the DRS, where
the data is read and recorded as parameter 38.

N.B.  THE FOLLOWING IS ONLY TO BE CARRIED OUT BY THE INSTRUMENT SECTION

The slow drift of the B pulse that occurs with time can be adjusted, but is
found normally not to be necessary.  Adjustment is effected in the Oscillator
Unit by opening the small cover on top and rotating the potentiometer beneath
it, using a small screwdriver in the exposed slot (DO NOT alter the sealed
pot.).  Take care that the A pulse is kept on scale when increasing the B
pulse as both move together with the adjustment.  For this reason the B pulse
is best kept below 50%.

Pre-Flight

1.   Switch the 230V on the Control Unit to - ON and log time.  Check amber
     neon illuminates and temperature meter indicates low.  If in doubt, check
     power supply unit, Rack 2, caged ON and two blue lamps illuminated.
2.   Switch the O/P and the Control Unit - ON, and check red light
     illuminates.
3.   Allow sufficient warm up time, 30 to 90 minutes depending on ambient
     temperature.
4.   Open end then top access panels and check boom compartment for
     obstructions.



                                        -2-


                                                             APPENDIX 13
                                                             12 December 1989
5.   Check pin is wire-locked in pallet.
6.   Close top then end access panels.
7.   Fit winding handle: fit blank on stowage.
8.   Open compartment outer door.
9.   Check clear outside.
10.  Wind boom fully out and lock.
11.  Check security of flexible piping between end door and connected
     equipment.
12.  Rear Van: Check O/P oscillator switch ON.
13.  Check boom secure and correctly aligned.
14.  Check cavity clean and undamaged.
15.  Retract Boom and close compartment doors.
16.  Check left-hand meter is to MONITOR and select B.  As warm up proceeds, 
     the meter will increase from a low to high reading and go off scale.  It 
     should then return to zero and slowly continue to increase.  Soon after  
     this stage the instrument should start to operate.  Check MONITOR A comes  
     on scale from zero, so that 0< monitor B < monitor A < 100.
17.  Check left-hand meter is on scale in the MEASURE position, note the
     reading and time in log.
18.  Turn clock potentiometer until the right-hand meter reading is zero. 
     Check that the potentiometer reading corresponds to the reading on the
     left-hand meter in the MEASURE position.
19.  Check the parameter 38 reading on the DRS corresponds with the left-hand
     meter in the MEASURE position.

In-Flight

1.   The instrument should only be run is specifically required (FTI or
     Aircraft Scientist).
2.   Avoid extending boom in thick cloud or rain as it will stop working if
     water/ice gets in the cavity, and droplet impact will damage the
     gold-plating if continuous.
3.   Log readings of monitor B and temperature every 30 minutes whether or not
     the boom is extended.  Log readings of pulse separation (meter to
     measure), and note changes of sensitivity (ie. high or low) when boom is
     extended.
4.   The Flight Leader should make a periodic check of the left-hand meter in
     MEASURE  position against parameter 38 on DRS.
5.   The instrument operates correctly when the left-hand meter, set to
     MONITOR B, is between 30 and 85% full scale.  The reading tends to
     increase with time and temperature.  During transits with the boom in, to
     keep the B pulse below 85% and temp below 35 Degrees, the outer door can
     be opened without extending the boom, to allow cold air to circulate. 
     (Meter readings on MEASURE may well drop to zero or full scale as
     instrument stops working at high levels.)  If the temperature persists
     above 35o, extend the boom if weather etc. permits, otherwise turn off
     power for a while.  During operation with the boom out, the temperature
     is most likely to fall, especially in cold seasons and high altitude. 





                                        -3-


                                                             APPENDIX 13
                                                             12 December 1989

     The instrument should still operate satisfactorily below 24o but the
     MONITOR B meter may drift below 25%.  In this event the boom should be
     brought in and adjustment made of the pot. in the Oscillator Unit as
     detailed in the Principles of Operation.  This should not be necessary as
     routine, and all changes should be entered in the log and noted in the
     faults book.  The direction and number of turns necessary to bring
     monitor A and B on scale should be noted in the log.
6.   Before landing Boom IN doors closed.

Post-Flight

1.   Check cavity clean and undamaged.
2.   After flights at low level over sea and in windy conditions, the cavity
     should be sprayed with distilled water followed by methylated spirits to
     clear any salt deposits.  During winter use meths. only.  Carefully dry
     with tissue if necessary.  This should be done immediately after flight,
     and not left until next morning.  
3.   The Boom compartment tends to collect moisture and should be left open
     inside the aircraft after flight to avoid condensation.

































                                        -4-                           
