
                                                                   APPENDIX 24
                                                                   04 Nov 1993
                               JOHNSON WILLIAMS

Circuit Breakers Required

Forward Bulkhead:  - MRF Main Distribution Panel
                     a)  28V JB4B supply
                     b)  115V JB4B supply
                     c)  200 V JB4B supply
                     MRF Anti-icing Panel
                     a)  J/W CB
Rear of Van JB4B:  - a)  28V CB Johnson Williams
                     b)  200V CB Johnson Williams

THE JOHNSON WILLIAMS MUST NOT BE SWITCHED ON WHILST ON THE GROUND.

(The Johnson Williams is connected to the weights on wheels switch which
prevents the instrument being switched on whilst on the ground.  However this
switch can be overridden by the anti-icing key switch.)

Principles of Operation

The J/W Liquid Water Content Indicator is designed for aircraft use to measure
the concentration of liquid water in clouds during flight.  A calibrated
resistance wire which has been mounted in the airstream is connected to one
arm of a balanced bridge circuit and is heated by an electric current.  As the
water droplets in the cloud strike the wire, they are evaporated, thus cooling
the wire and thereby decreasing its resistance.  The change in resistance
causes the bridge to become unbalanced, and the degree of unbalance is a
function of the liquid-water content of the cloud.

A second resistance wire, mounted with its axis parallel to the airstream
direction and hence not subject to water=drop impingement, is connected as an
adjacent leg of the bridge in the compensated mode.  This wire serves to
compensate for variations in airspeed, altitude, and air temperature, so that
the output of the bridge is proportional to the rate of impingement of water
on the sensing wire.

In the direct mode, the compensating wire transformer in the bridge circuit is
replaced by a fixed resistor.  The meter reading is directly related to the
power dissipated in the sensing wire, and may be noisy, reflecting changes in
airspeed, height and temperature.  The instrument will require zeroing
frequently and the "zero adj." dial reading recorded.  Compensation of the
data for variations in airspeed, temperature and height can be done from data
recorded by the other instruments.
The signal goes from the sensor to the control unit and then to an interface
board in MILLIE where it converted from (0-10) volts to DRS units. It is
recorded on the DRS as parameter 42.  Software on HORACE and TARDIS applies the
3LC equation and also converts the signal to concentration of water per unit
volume by means of an adjustment for true airspeed.

Pre Flight

1.   Select desired mode with the switch at the back of unit:-
     i)   COMPENSATED MODE
    ii)   DIRECT MODE -  This effectively removes the Compensating wire to
                         produce the following result  
                         a)   Zero less stable, will require adjusting when
                              height and/or airspeed changes
                         b)   Need to log the zero dial setting
     NB. For normal operation the compensated mode is selected.
2.   Check J/W circuit breaker broken and clipped (red clip) on JB4B panel
3.   Check ON/OFF switch on the display unit is OFF
4.   Check two wires intact and that the probe is clean and undamaged.
5.   Check, if in COMPENSATED MODE that the COMPENSATION dial on the front of
the control unit is FULLY ANTICLOCKWISE and locked in place.

In Flight

1.   "After take-off" Unclip circuit breaker and stow clip, MAKE J/W JB4B CB
2.   Switch display unit ON
3.   Check TAS control on display is set to 150 kts.
4.   Check COMP. ADJUST control on display is set fully anticlockwise
5.   Check MODE SET TO COMP. (unless required otherwise)
6.   When at a constant altitude, steady airspeed and in clear air operate
     Zero Adjust and set needle to zero - Event Mark DRS. 
     PLEASE NOTE THAT THIS SHOULD BE DONE ONLY ONCE IN A FLIGHT , AND AS CLOSE
     TO THE START OF THE FLIGHT AS POSSIBLE. 
7.   Switch range control on display to the required range ie. 0 - 1 or 0 - 3
8.   If in DIRECT mode, log Zero dial setting
9.   Monitor and log the maximum value registered during each pass through
     cloud
10.  Before landing, switch Display Unit OFF
11.  Break J/W circuit breaker and clip on JB4B
12.  Break J/W CB on MRF Anti-icing Panel

Post Flight

1.   Check Johnson Williams probe clean and undamaged
2.   After low level flights over the sea spray sensor with distilled water
     followed by methylated spirit to clear any salt deposits.  In winter use
     meths. only.



                                        -2-
