
                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984
                                       
   OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE 2D KNOLLENBERG OPTICAL ARRAY/FSSP PROBES

1.   Introduction

The 2D Knollenberg/FSSP equipment consists of:-

1.1  Cloud droplet probe, OAP-2D-C (25-800æm diam)
1.2  Precipitation probe, OAP-2D-P (200-6400æm diam)
1.3  FSSP probe (0.5-47æm diam)
1.4  Data formatter
1.5  CRT monitor
1.6  Data acquisition system (DAS)
1.7  Tape Recorders (2)
Items 1.1 to 1.3 are situated on the port maxipod.
Items 1.4 to 1.7 are in the 2D Knollenberg cabinet at the rear of the cargo
hold.

The 2D Knollenberg Cloud and Precipitation Probes generate two-dimensional
images of cloud and precipitation particles which are recorded on magnetic
tape.  The output from either probe may be displayed on the CRT monitor.

The system works by taking `snapshots' using a line of photo diodes, and is
optimised if the aircraft flies a distance R between successive snapshots,
where R is the effective centre to centre separation of the photo diodes. 
Ideally, the snapshot rate would be linked automatically to the aircraft's
true airspeed, but this is not possible.

The Forward Scattering Spectrometer Probe (FSSP) sizes particles in four
ranges from0.5 to 47æm (diam).  Particles are sized by measuring the amount of
light scattered into the collecting optics aperture during particle
interactions through a focussed laser beam.  The system resolves particles
into fifteen equally spaced sizes at velocities of 20 to 125 m sec-1.

The FSSP also has available outputs of Total Strobes, Activity, Reference
Voltage and Particle Transit Time.  The Reference Voltage is a measure of the
laser output and the Transit Time is an average of the time taken for
particles to cross the laser beam.

The Data Acquisition System is designed to accept two 2D probes (in our case
precipitation and cloud) and two 1D probes designated A and B.  The A slot is
used by the FSSP and the B slot for extra data from the FSSP and also to
record holographic and liquid water content information.

Other modifications to the DAS include the fitting of controls for the
holographic system and the addition of two panel meters, one for liquid water
content (derived from the Johnson Williams) and the other for the FSSP
Reference Voltage/Particle Transit Time.

With reference to the Holographic Disdrometer operating instructions it is
possible to expose holograms, advance film and mark frame number from the DAS.
A red light adjacent to the expose hologram button shows that the laser key
switch is on.
                                        -1-


                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984 
Normally the aircraft is requested to fly at, and the 2D system is set for, a
true airspeed of 100m/s.  Sometimes this speed is not possible and the system
has to be set for a different speed.

2.   Safety

The laser in each 2D sensor is regarded as potentially hazardous.  Only
personnel authorised by Head of Facilities Section may book out the keys and
operate the 2D Knollenberg system.  Operation is to be strictly in accordance
with the current safety procedures.

2.   Before Leaving Building

Collect and book out keys from Aircraft Managers' office; collect sufficient
blank tapes (with Write-Enable rings), 2D Knollenberg log forms, laser safety
goggles (blue) and calibration gear for the FSSP.

4.   Circuit Breakers Required
     
     Co-pilot's MRF DC Circuit Breaker Panel - MRF MAIN & ESS DC BUS - MRF
     POWER CONTROL

     Co-pilot's Upper Circuit Breaker Panel - MAIN AC BUS - MRF POWER (PHASES
     A, B, & C)

     Pilot's Upper Circuit Breaker Panel - LH. RH. & ESS AC BUS - MRF POWER
     (PHASES A, B & C)

     MRF Main Distribution Panel
          a.   28V DC - Junction Box Power Supplies - JB 6
          b.   115V AC - Junction Box Power Supplies - JB 6
     Junction Box No 6
          a.   28V DC - 2D Knollenberg Control
          b.   115V AC - 2DC Probe
          c.           - 2DP Probe
          d.           - PMS Equip
          e.           - FSSP

5.   Pre-Flight

5.1  Switch on       a.  Tape recorders
                     b.  Data Formatter
                     c.  CRT Monitor
                     d.  Data Acquisition System (DAS)

5.2  Set in correct date, and GMT to next nearest whole minute.  When the DRS
     reaches 59 seconds, depress START (SYNC) button until clock starts.  The
     clock will now be in sync with the DRS clock.  NB.  If the DRS is not in
     use the DAS clock may be started with the START button to the right of
     the panel meters.  Clock synchronisation will need to be repeated
     following power transfer.

                                        -2-


                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984
5.3  Pre-Flight Calibration and Testing
     
     Arrange with Aircraft Supervisor for a safety raiser to be positioned
     under maxipod.  If it is necessary to move the safety raiser ensure that
     generous clearance is maintained bearing in mind that the aircraft rocks
     in the wind and settles during re-fuelling.

     Check DAS Settings (2D)

     a.   ALL/SUB                  set to SUB (ALL is a house-keeping guide)
     b.   CRT DISPLAY               "   " IMAGES/SPECTRA as required
     c.   RUN/HOLD                  "   " RUN (HOLD freezes memory)
     d.   SET TAS/TEST              "   " TEST
     e.   Thumbwheel switches set to  DATA RATE     DISPLAY    PROBE RANGE
                                          3         A 0 3        0     0
                                                                 A     B

                                   This causes clock frequency to be displayed
                                   as SELECTED WORD
     f.   SELECTED WORD will read 0100
     g.   2D RATE                  set to 3 (for max data recording rate)

5.4  Load tape (with WR/EN ring)
5.5  Press LOAD - LOAD - ON LINE
5.6  Press RECORD and check tape steps through (recording house-keeping
     information), then REWIND.
5.7
     a.   Set display to EXPAND, PROBE A (CLOUD) selected
     b.   Switch on laser key switch (in accordance with current safety
          procedures).
     c.   Wearing the laser safety goggles flick a thin piece of
          non-reflecting wire through the laser beam on the probe for about
          30 seconds.
     d.   Inspect the display, ensure that all diodes are lit/shadowed ie. no
          continuous horizontal lines through wire shadow, and that the
          shadows extend across all 32 diodes.

5.8  Select PROBE B (PRECIP) and repeat b) to d).
5.9  After test switch off the probes and put SET TAS/TEST switch to SET TAS.

Check DAS settings (FSSP)

     a.   ALL/SUB                  Set to         SUB
     b.   CRT DISPLAY               "  "          SPECTRA
     c.   SAMPLE/HOLD               "  "          SAMPLE
     d.   SET TAS/TEST              "  "          SET TAS
     e.   THUMBWHEEL SWITCHES set to:-
                              DATA RATE      DISPLAY       PROBE RANGE
                                  3          C 0 3           0     0 
                                                             A     B
     f.   FSSP display settings (these are all the switches to the right of
          the images/spectra switch).  None of these switches affect the data
          on the tape.  
                                        -3-


                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984
NOMINAL SETTINGS

PROBE                A
SECONDS/RESET        10
SAMPLE/HOLD          SAMPLE
AUTO/MANUAL          AUTO
TOTAL                x 10 (CHANNEL 0)
CALIBRATE/SPECTRA    SPECTRA
VERTICAL             99 (PARTICLE TOTAL FOR CHANNELS 0-15)

With the calibrate/spectra switch on calibrate, the size and position of the
display can be altered using the two small rotary buttons marked V and H.

5.10 FSSP CALIBRATION

An FSSP calibration should ideally be performed before flight, being in some
respects more of an instrument check than a calibration.  On low level flights
the lens gets dirty and affects the equipment calibration.

In such cases a calibration should be performed before and after the flight.

a.   Switch on FSSP as for flight at least 15 minutes before the calibration
     is started, observe that the laser has fired and that the reference
     voltage is steady (a small drift is expected, see f iii) below).

b.   Clamp droplet generator rig onto probe, plug into droplet generator
     electronics box and turn on.  (NB.  The droplet generator will completely
     blot out the LORAN signals to the NAVAID system.  Liaise with NAVAID
     operator before switching on).

c.   Turn water on for a fast flow and let water run through until no air
     bubbles can be seen in the pipe, then set water value to 50.

d.   There should be a mist visible at the droplet generator (unless wind is
     strong). 

e.   Turn on vacuum pump.

f.   i)   The spectrum shape should be       with a peak around channel 6 on
          range 0.
    ii)   The transit time should be approx 30 and will be displayed on the
          panel meter if range 0, 1 or 2 is selected. 
   iii)   The reference voltage should be approximately 8 volts and is
          displayed on the panel meter if range 3 is selected. 

g.   If all the conditions of para f) have been met, record ranges 0 and 1 for
     4/5 minutes and then ranges 2 and 3 for a few minutes if time allows;
     dismantle and put away all test equipment; otherwise equipment is
     possibly faulty and expert advice should be sought and the Aircraft
     Scientist informed.

h.   Record on log sheet the present weather ie. SE 10KTS LIGHT RAIN.
                     
                                        -4-


                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984
i.   Remove calibration tape.

Individual channel counts may be inspected using the DISPLAY thumbwheel
switches as follows:-

          C    CHANNEL No 3

To hold the display put the SAMPLE/HOLD switch to HOLD and the AUTO/MANUAL
switch to MANUAL.

When decreasing the seconds to reset time, set in the new time, select MANUAL
on the AUTO/MANUAL switch and press the MANUAL button.

Housekeeping data ie. Activity, Total Strobes, Johnson Williams, Transit
time/Reference Voltage, Holography Time and Frame Count may be viewed by
selecting probe B and are shown on the CRT display in the above order
(channels 1-6).

5.11 Holography

If it is intended to expose holograms from the DAS during the sortie check
before flight that the Expose Hologram and Advance Film buttons function
correctly.

6.   In-Flight
6.1  Set in correct data and GMT; restart in sync with DRS clock.
6.2  When required switch on laser beams using key switches.
6.3  Set following DAS switches as required:-

     a.   2D PROBE            set to A or B, as required (controls Monitor
                              only)
                              A is CLOUD probe
                              B is PRECIPITATION probe

     b.   ALL/EXPAND          set to either, as required.
                              ALL displays 4 areas of 160 slices each.
                              EXPAND displays any one area (A, B, C or D, as
                              selected on thumb-wheel switch below) as 2 areas
                              of 80 slices each.

     c.   DATA RATE           set to 3, or see para 6.7 for non-standard
                              airspeed.

     d.   SELECTED WORD       set to 8000 ñ20, or see para 6.7 for
                              non-standard airspeed.

     e.   RECORD or STOP      Ensure both recorders in record mode.  Recording
                              may be stopped (eg. if no activity is observed)
                              or restarted at any time.  Enter details on the
                              log sheet.

     f.   Data rate is set as required but if the 2D probes are to be used the
          data must be > 3.
                                        - -5-


                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984 
6.4  Information for 2D Log Sheets

Include the following occurrences where applicable.

a.   2D s overloaded and/or condensation suspected.
b.   2D images are crystals or drops.
c.   2D data mainly in cloud probe or in precip probe as well.
d.   Note occurrence if spectra clearly exceed FSSP CH 15 and carefully note
     range changes.
e.   Some LWC values from the J-W would be useful.

6.5  Tape Changing

     6.5.1     When end of tape automatically initiates rewind
               (and recording continues on the other recorder)

     a.   Press ON LINE (to switch off-line)
     b.   Press REWIND
     c.   When rewind is complete remove tape and ensure identified (note in
          box)
     d.   Fit new tape (with WR/EN ring)

     6.5.2     When tape is to be changed before end

     a.   Press STOP on DAS (to complete writing current data block and write
          EOF mark)
     b.   Press ON LINE on Tape Deck (to switch off-line)
     c.   Press REWIND
     d.   When rewinding stops press REWIND again
     e.   When rewind is complete remove tape and ensure identified (note in
          box)
     f.   Fit new tape (with WR/EN ring)

6.6  Interpretation of CRT display

Data display and recording is initiated by the detection of a particle; when
the aircraft is flying through cloud/precipitation free air the display and
tape will be static apart from the recording of `slow' data.  Thick cloud or
heavy precipitation will cause frequent changes of display and tape
incrementing.

Full vertical scale for each slice is 800æm for the Cloud Probe and 6400æm for
the Precipitation Probe.  The smallest detectable particle size is 25æm
(cloud) or 200æm (Precipitation), but in each case representation of size is
not very accurate.

If the aircraft is flying at the true airspeed appropriate to the selected
word (see para 6.7), a spherical particle will be represented as a circular
image.  Higher speed will result in lateral compression of the image and vice
versa.


                                        -6-


                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984 
On the FSSP display the following multipliers will give the radius in microns
for a channel:

     R0 x 1.5; R1 x 1.0; R2 x 0.5; R3 x 0.25; ie. CH 6 R0 is 9æm.

6.7  Non-standard true airspeed

It is preferable to fly at a true airspeed of 100 m/s with a data rate of > 3
and selected word of 8000, but on occasions this will not be possible. 
Optimum operation will be obtained at a true airspeed of V m/s if the selected
word is adjusted:-

          SELECTED WORD - 80 x V  (DATA RATE 3)

          SELECTED WORD - 40 x V  (DATA RATE 4)

Examples:-

          TRUE AIRSPEED                 SELECTED WORD 

          Knot       m/s           Data rate 3   Data rate 4
          146         75              6000           3000
          194        100              8000           4000
          243        125                             5000
          291        150                             6000

At true airspeed of 125 m/s or more, data rate 4 is to be used otherwise data
will be lost.

6.8  Change of selected word

STOP recording during a change of SELECTED WORD and/or DATA RATE; try to
achieve SELECTED WORD within 0.25% of that required.  Changes of selected
word/data rate should be kept to a minimum.  Log all changes.  The Aircraft
Scientist is responsible for informing the 2D operator of the TAS to be flown
and for keeping a log of TAS (from the Navigator's TAS display).

6.9  Event Marking

If desired the MINUTESor SECONDS SET buttons may be used as event markers.

6.10 Faults

a.   Icing on probes - although both 2D probes have heaters for de-icing, ice
     can build up in adverse conditions; this may cause a constantly changing
     display and continuous tape incrementing; the presence of ice on the
     precipitation probe can be confirmed by visual inspection from a forward
     window.  Switch off affected probe(s) until ice has cleared.

b.   Condensation on optics - this sometimes occurs following descent into a
     moist layer with the same symptoms as icing.  Switch off affected probe
     for a few minutes to allow condensation to clear.
                                        -7-


                                                                 APPENDIX 39
                                                                 30 March 1984
6.11 Holography

Note that to expose hologram from the DAS the REMOTE/MANUAL switch must be in
the REMOTE position on the Holography Control Unit.

7.   Pre-Landing

Switch off the laser beams.  Confirm `OFF' to Flight Leader's pre-landing
checks.

8.   Switching Off

8.1  Before landing switch off the probe(s) and remove key(s).

8.2  Rewind and remove tape.






































                                        -8-

                                                                        
