
                                                                APPENDIX 30
                                                             4th April 2000
                                AVAPS - Dropsonde System

This page presently being updated.
The data shown relates to the old dropsonde system which is no longer in use.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Circuit Breakers Required

1.   Co-pilots upper CB panel - Main AC BUS
                              - MRF power - Phases A, B, C

2.   Co-pilots DC CB panel - MRF main and ESS DC BUS
                           - MRF power control

3.   Cargo hold forward bulkhead - MRF Main Distribution panel
          a.   28V DC - Lamp test
          b.          - Dropsonde Ejector (2 CBs)
          c.   200V AC - TRU

Pre-Flight

1.   Check that External ejector cover plate has been removed.
2.   Check that Internal ejector cover plate has been removed.
3.   Check that T-handle tool is stowed in Ejector's foot well.
4.   Check receive/transmit facilities on both Conf and I/C.
5.   Check condition of sonde carriage.
6.   Switch on and check dropsonde timer.
7.   Zero ejection counter.
8.   If a ground test is required proceed as relevant below, but using dummy
     sonde.
9.   Switch master switch to ON.
10   Switch Service switch to ARMED.
11.  ON TAXY, Request Engineer/Loadmaster to switch Hydraulic Isolation Cock
     to ON.
12.  Press Ejection Start button and hold until illuminated.  Ejection System 
     Energised lamp will illuminate.  When drum has rotated to loading 
     position both lights will go out.
13.  Switch Master switch OFF.
14.  Request Engineer/Loadmaster to switch Hydraulic Isolation Cock OFF.

In-Flight

1.   When nearing operating area check with Flight Leader that Ramp TV and
     Video system is ready.
2.   Reset dropsonde timer.
3.   Open loading door and load sonde.
4.   Check that arming clip is located over peg and that seam is located in
     groove.
5.   Draw strap over sonde and secure in position.
6.   Remove arming plug and wait three seconds to ensure that parachute does
     not deploy.
7.   Close and lock sonde loading door.  Report on I/C that sonde number .....
     is LOADED. 
9.   Monitor countdown to sonde ejection point and at one minute to go switch 
     Master Switch to ON and Request Engineer/Loadmaster to switch Hydraulic 
     Isolator Cock to ON..


                                        -1-


                                                                APPENDIX 30
                                                           12 February 1991

10.  On the call "5, 4, 3, 2, 1, now" simultaneously press Ejection Start
     button (hold until illuminated) and event mark.
11.  On completion of rotation sequence switch Master Switch OFF, request
     Hydraulics OFF, open loading  door and confirm that sonde has or has not
     ejected, report on I/C.
12.  Check condition of carriage.  Note Dropsonde Timer Reading.  See Notes.

SONDE REMOVAL

1.   Check Master switch is OFF.
2.   Open sonde loading door.
3.   Replace Arming Plug.
4.   Unstrap sonde from carriage, remove and pass to Handler.

Pre-landing Checks

1.   Inform Engineer/Loadmaster of number of ejections.
2.   Check that Master Switch is OFF.
3.   Request Engineer/Loadmaster to switch Hydraulic Isolation Cock to OFF.

Post-Flight

1.   BEFORE ENGINE SHUTDOWN, check that sonde drum is empty.
2.   Switch Service Switch to NEUTRAL.
3.   Switch Master Switch to ON.
4.   Request Engineer/Loadmaster to switch Hydraulic Isolation Cock to ON.
5.   Press Ejection Start button and hold until light illuminates (The
     Ejection Energised lamp and Ejection Start lamps will illuminate.
     When the drum has rotated to the neutral position the Ejection System
     Energised and Ejection Start lamps will extinguish but the Neutral lamp
     will remain illuminated.)
6.   Switch Master Switch to OFF.  All lights will extinguish.
7.   Request Engineer/Loadmaster to switch Hydraulic Isolation Cock to
     ISOLATE.
8.   Switch dropsonde timer OFF.
9.   Return all ties, labels, arming plugs to MRF.

Special Handling Features or Safety Recommendations

NOTES

1.  The normal ground position of the sonde carriage is facing outwards ie in
     the NEUTRAL position, (springs untensioned and condensation cannot build
     up on the balsa carriage).

2.   Each ejection shall be observed using the Ramp TV System.  If an
     operational sonde is observed to rise within 7 feet of the aircraft after
     ejection, a frangible sonde shall be ejected.  The trial with operational
     sondes may continue if this ejection is successful.  If it is not, two
     further frangible sondes may be ejected.  Both ejections shall be
     successful for the trial to continue with sondes.  The trial, with
     sondes, shall be discontinued if a total of any three ejections result in
     the sonde rising to within 7 feet of the aircraft.
                                   -2-

                                                                APPENDIX 30
                                                           26 November 1990

3.   The time difference between release of each end of the carriage shall be
     observed.  If the carriage time shows a time difference of more than 10
     ms, the ejector shall be fired twice without a sonde.  Sonde ejection may
     continue if both operations give a time difference of less than 10 ms. 
     If either time difference is more than 10 ms, two frangible sondes shall
     be ejected.  The further successful ejection of operational sondes will
     indicate a time malfunction and its indications during the rest of the
     sortie may be ignored.

























                                        -3-


                                                                      
