
                                                                  APPENDIX 40
                                                                 19 April 1988
                            Holographic Disdrometer

Circuit Breakers Required

Position                                Labelled

Flight-deck overhead panel (RHS)        Laser Master (toggle switch)
MRF LH AC BUS (Flight-deck)             Laser Control (Phases A,B,C) 
Junction-box JB4B                       28V DC        Camera
(rear of the recorder van)                            Camera Htr.
                                                      Laser
          "                             200V AC       Holog CU

Principles of Operation

1.   The holography installation comprises three main parts:

     a)   The laser head and associated electronics - in the starboard
          maxipod.
     b)   The F95 camera and associated electronics - in the minipod.
     c)   The holographic control unit (HCU) - presently situated in the rear
          of the van but due to be moved to the top of the 2D console.

2.   The equipment is designed to expose holographs on special photographic
     film when the aircraft is in cloud.  This film is developed after the
     flight when 3-dimensional images of cloud ice particles and water drops
     may be reconstructed.

3.   In normal operation, the camera and the laser are synchronised such that
     when the shutter reaches its maximum open position, the laser is fired
     via a microswitch inside the camera thus exposing the hologram.  The
     camera is operated by pulses sent to its control electronics by the HCU. 
     In addition, the laser may be fired separately without advancing the
     film and the film advanced without firing the laser.  The former is only
     done on the ground in order to check the laser operation, whilst the
     latter may also be used in the air to insert blank frames into the
     sequence of exposed holograms.  Holograms may be exposed either singly or
     at a rate of 2 per second by holding down the 'expose hologram' button. 
     The frame counter reading on the HCU is recorded at 4Hz on the DRS
     (Parameter 46).  In addition, the 'expose hologram' pulses are sent to
     the 2D DAS, where the pulse time is stored in a buffer and recorded as
     part of the housekeeping data.

4.   The controls on the HCU front panel are:
     
     a)   HCU on.
     b)   Camera and Htr.
     c)   Laser on (key-switch).





                                        -1-


                                                                  APPENDIX 40
                                                                 19 April 1988                  
     These three should be switched on in this order.

     d)   Fire laser.  Fires the laser directly without operating the camera.
     e)   Advance film.  This advances the film by one frame without the laser
          being fired.
     f)   Expose hologram.  Advances the film by one frame with the laser
          being fired to expose the hologram when the shutter reaches its
          full-open position.

     Advance film and Expose hologram buttons are duplicated on the 2D
     console.  Holding any of these buttons depressed will cause the laser
     and/or camera to run continuously at 2 frames/firings per second. 

     g)   Manual/remote.  Determines whether the system will be operated from
          the van (manual) or 2D (remote) position.
     h)   Mark frame number.  This is currently inoperative.
     i)   Reset frame count.  Resets the HCU frame counter to zero.
     j)   Lamp test.  Illuminates all segments of the HCU frame counter
          display.

Pre Flight

1.   Separate instructions for the loading of the film magazines are included
     in Annex A of these instructions.

2.   Items that should be taken to the aircraft are:

     a)   2 headsets
     b)   Holography laser key (booked out from FLO's office by an authorised
          keyholder)
     c)   Loaded film magazine.
     d)   Holography laser safety goggles (amber).  These are normally
          resident in FLO's office.
     e)   Laser safety notices and Met 0 15 toolkit.  These are normally in
          the Met O 15 barrow.

3.   The pre-flight checking of the holographic system consists of checking
     the satisfactory operation of the laser and film advance mechanism.  This
     requires two people, one inside the aircraft to operate the controls and
     one outside to monitor the operation of the equipment.

4.   The laser safety notices should be placed a few feet in front of and
     behind the wing at a point roughly between the maxipod and minipod.

5.   A safety raiser should be placed under the minipos to enable easy access
     to the camera loading panel.  The latter should be removed, and the dummy
     magazine removed.

6.   The loaded magazine should then be fitted to the camera.  This is
     sometimes a 'fiddly' operation and care should be taken to ensure that
     the magazine is correctly located.  The insulating muff should then be
     replaced around the camera.

                                        -2-


                                                                  APPENDIX 40
                                                                 19 April 1988           
7.   The MRF long intercom extension lead (stowed just forward of the
     right-hand para. door) should be run out to the maxipod position and
     connected the the intercom box by the right-hand passenger seats
     (switched to transmit on 'PA').

8.   Having made all the necessary circuit breakers, the equipment should be
     switched on in the order:

     a)   HCU
     b)   Camera and Htr
     c)   Laser (using the key-switch).
       
     The sound of the laser running should be clearly audible to the person
     standing outside the laser hazard zone (defined in MRF Admin Instruction
     3/83) in front of the nose of the maxipod.  It may however be necessary
     to switch off the In-cloud Temperature Probe in order to hear this.

9.   Having checked with the outside person that it is clear to fire the
     laser, the person in the van should perform the following operations:

     a)   Fire laser.  A bright green flash will be visible to the outside
          person in the area around the camera aperture in the minipod.  The
          visibility of this flash may be reduced when the minipod is brightly
          illuminated by the sun.
     b)   Expose hologram.  2 to 3 frames should be exposed.  The sound of the
          camera operating will be audible to the outside person, and the
          laser flash should be visible on each exposure.
     c)   Advance film.  1 or 2 blank frames to ensure that this function is
          operating and to clearly separate the frames exposed on the ground.

10.  When these checks have been satisfactorily completed, the camera loading
     panel should be secured and checked by the flight engineer.  The
     equipment in the van may be switched off in the reverse of the order
     given in para 8 above.

In Flight

1.   As soon as possible after take-off, the camera and heater should be
     switched on.  If this is not done and the camera allowed to fall to low
     temperatures, the film will become very rigid.  This may cause
     malfunctions of the film advance.

2.   The laser may also be conveniently switched on at this stage, having
     ensured that the flight-deck laser master switch is on.  Note that the
     liquid coolant in the laser does not freeze above about -55oC and hence
     it is not necessary to switch on the laser on flights where it will not
     be required for experimental use.

3.   Holograms may be fired from either the HCU or the 2D console depending on
     the setting of the MANUAL/REMOTE switch.


                                        -3-


                                                                  APPENDIX 40
                                                                 19 April 1988                         
4.   It is normal practice to expose holograms in sequences of a minimum of
     about 10 exposures.  This then enables the representativeness of the
     holographic data obtained from individual exposures to be determined. 
     Such a sequence may be obtained by holding down the 'expose hologram'
     button for a period of 5 seconds, or alternatively each shot may be
     exposed manually at intervals of about 1 second.

5.   After each sequence of exposures, a single blank frame should then be
     taken to event-mark the film using the 'advance film' button.  This is
     particularly important if holograms are being exposed in sequences
     greater than 10.  The frame counter reading should then be recorded. 
     Note that the display on the HCU is in octal.  If the frame count is
     being monitored on the DRS display, note that only the 8 least
     significant bits are used.
 
6.   The holographic film is currently loaded in lengths of 110 metres. 
     Allowing for a small amount of wastage at the beginning of the film, this
     is sufficient for a total of about 150 frames (including any blanks). 
     The HCU frame counter will therefore read about 230 when all the film is
     used.

7.   The camera should remain switched on until the pre-landing checks stage. 
     Again this is to ensure that the film does not get excessively cold, when
     moisture may condense on it after landing.

8.   Equipment should be switched off in the order:

     a)   Laser
     b)   Camera
     c)   Holography Control Unit.

     Following this, the four circuit breakers on JB4B in the rear of the van
     may be pulled.

Post Flight

1.   The film magazine should be unloaded, the dummy magazine refitted, and
     the access panel secured.

2.   The magazine may be unloaded in the darkroom under a dark-red safelight. 
     The exposed film should be sealed in a light-tight tin marked clearly
     with the Flight number and the word 'EXPOSED' and returned to Bracknell
     for development at the earliest opportunity.
     
3.   Any unexposed film may be returned to storage in the film fridge in a
     light- and moisture-proof container.  This should be marked with an
     estimate of the length of unexposed film remaining.  This may be
     estimated for example from the final frame counter reading and assuming
     approximately 15 frames per metre of film with a wastage of about 0.5
     metre at the beginning of the film.


                                        -4-


                                                                  APPENDIX 40
                                                                 19 April 1988

1.   The holographic laser itself is potentially hazardous.  Only authorized
     and trained personnel may book out the key and operate the system, and
     operation should be in accordance with the guidelines given in MRF Admin.
     Instruction No 3/83.

2.   In normal operation there should be no need for any person to be inside
     the hazard zone defined in the above Instruction when the laser is
     powered up.  During pre-flight checks, it is the responsibility of the
     operator in the van to check via the intercom with the person outside
     that he is in a safe position before any firing of the laser takes place.

3.   If for any reason it is necessary for the person outside to work in the
     region between the maxipod and minipod, he should ensure that he is
     wearing the amber safety goggles and that he does not view the direct
     beam as it emerges from the maxipod.




































                                        -5-

                                       
                                                                  APPENDIX 40
                                                                19 April 1988
                                           Annex A

Loading the F95 Holographic Camera Magazine

1.   This should be done in the darkroom under a DARK-RED safelight.

2.   New films are stored in the fridge in the Physics lab.  These are
     currently 10 metres in length, and a full new film should be used for
     each experimental flight.

3.   In the future film may be obtained on 30 metre rolls.  In this case it
     may be acceptable to load partly-used films provided that a minimum of
     about 10 metres is available.  Approximately 15 frames are obtained per
     metre of film.

4.   There are two holography film magazines normally stored in the darkroom
     cupboard.  They are clearly labelled as such as they have had some metal
     machined away to accommodate the thicker base material of the holographic
     film.  Ordinary F95 magazines should NOT be used with holographic film
     due to the possibility of the film jamming.

5.   The loading sequence is as follows:

     a)   Remove the external cover plate, if fitted.
     b)   Remove the magazine cover by means of the knurled screw.
     c)   Open the film backing plate by means of squeezing together the two
          silver levers on the side of the magazine. 
     d)   Place the film with its metal core onto the feed spool.
     e)   Feed the film around the guide rollers and backing plate as shown in
          the diagram.
     f)   Mount an empty metal core on the take-up spool and attach the film
          underneath one of its spring plates.
     g)   Close the film backing plate, ensuring that the film sprocket holes
          are aligned with the sprocket teeth and that the film edge is
          parallel to the edge of the take-up spool core.
     h)   Take up any slack by manually turning the take-up spool.
     i)   Refit the magazine cover.  Turn the screw with four red dots in a
          clockwise direction as indicated by the arrow to ensure that the
          film is feeding correctly, but take care not to waste unnecessary
          amounts of film.
     j)   Lightly scratch the flight number and/or date on the film.
     k)   With the normal room light on ensure that the film has its emulsion
          (purple) side facing outwards.  The backing side of the film will
          appear red or orange.
     l)   Refit the external cover plate while the magazine is being carried
          out to the aircraft.







                                        -6-

                                                                       
