
                                                                APPENDIX 16
                                                                22 August 1989

                      POLLAK CONDENSATION NUCLEI COUNTER
                  (Samples via alleviator - see Appendix 15)

Circuit breakers required

1.   Cargo hold forward bulkhead - MRF Main Distribution Panel.

     a.   28v DC      - JB3A

     b.   115/200v AC - JB3A  0

2.   Forward fuselage, starboard side - Junction Box 3A

     a.   28v DC      - Pollak

     b.   115V AC 10  - Particulate Sampling.

Power

1.   Pollak Electronics Box

     a.   Power 

2.   Pollak Control Box

     a.   Power - 115v

     b.   Power - 28v

Principles of Operation

Concentrations of condensation nuclei are inferred by causing condensation on
the nuclei.  The instrument consists of a "fog tube" with a porous lining
which has been soaked in distilled water.  The fog tube is mounted vertically
with a light source at the top and photocell at the bottom.  Sampled air is
drawn into the fog tube where it is subjected to an overpressure by pumping in
filtered air.  This is followed by rapid expansion and hence adiabatic cooling
causing vapour to condense on the nuclei and thus the formation of droplets. 
The light passing down the tube is attenuated by the fog and the reduction in
output of the photocell is a measure of the concentration of nuclei.

Watering

a.   The Pollak counter porous lining requires saturating after approximately
     300 measurements or after a week if it has not been used.  A record of
     soaking and usage will be kept in the Aircraft Manager's Office.  The
     Aircraft Manager will arrange with workshops for the removal of the
     centre section at a suitable time.

b.   The distilled water etc are kept in the Instruments Lab.


                                        -1-


                                                                APPENDIX 16
                                                                22 August 1989

c.   Mount the column upright in the large retort stand (best done on the
     floor) and block the large opening at the bottom end and also the smaller
     side port (about «" up from the bottom end).

d.   Fill the column with distilled water and leave it for an hour or so.  If
     the water level falls through seepage past the bungs, top up as required. 
     A longer soaking may be required if the instrument has not been used for
     several weeks.

e.   Tip the water out (do not re-use) and remove the bungs.  Shake the column
     to get all excess drops out of the valve ports etc in the centre of the
     column.

f.   Stand the column on some clean absorbent paper (paper towel, blotting
     paper) and leave to drain for about 5 minutes.

g.   During this time, go out to the aircraft and clean both top and bottom
     cover plates with a lens tissue and alcohol.

h.   Also renew filter in holder mounted behind the Pollak and report any
     damage to replaced filter.

i.   Return column to workshops for refitting.

Pre-Flight Checks

1.   Switch on and allow time for lamp to stabilise.

2.   Work through Operator Pre-Flight Tasks and complete check list.

3.   The following should be noted when checking lamp and feedback
     electronics:

     a.   Ensure on AUTO meter reads -1.000 ñ 10% (adjust lamp bias pot if
          necessary).

     b.   Press CAL TEST, meter should read -1.000 ñ 1%.

     c.   Press LAMP BIAS, meter should read < - 1.200.

     d.   Switch to MEMORY, record drift after first few seconds.  Switch back
          to AUTO.










                                        -2-


                                                                APPENDIX 16
                                                                22 August 1989
4.   Typical readings are as follows:-

     a.   On the ground at Farnborough                    -.300 to -.900

     b.   In polluted boundary layer                      -.200 to -.500

     c.   Behind cold front and in maritime air mass      -.900 to -.990

     d.   Warm sector and in continental air mass         -.400 to -.900

     e.   Close to obvious industrial sources             -.050 to -.200


5.   Ensure rotary switch on CONTROL BOX is in STOP position.  Switch
     instrument off for power changeover and take off.

In Flight Operation

1.   Switch on and allow time for lamp to stabilise.

2.   Obtain air sample via ALLEVIATOR system.  (see Appendix 15)

3.   Switch POLLAK to SAMPLE for about 20 seconds then to COMPRESS - note time
     on log.

4.   Wait 1 minute then move on two switch positions from COMPRESS to EXPAND
     at the same  time move the POLLAK ELECTRONICS BOX switch from AUTO to
     MEMORY - note minimum reading on log.

5.   Move switch back to AUTO - meter should return to -1.000.

6.   Repeat 2 - 5 as required.

7.   The meter reading may be converted to a nucleus concentration using the
     tables provided.

8.   When sampling complete, ensure rotary switch on CONTROL BOX is in STOP
     position.  Switch power off and break circuit breakers on JB3A.

After Flight

1.   Annotate SOAK/USAGE log in Aircraft Manager's Office.

2.   Advise Aircraft Manager of instrument's status.

Problems

a.   Sample pressure outside limits - presure switch may need adjustment.
b.   Leaks - system will cycle between COMPRESS and HOLD - abort measurement.
c.   Optics dirty - on switching back to AUTO meter does not return to -1.000-
     adjust LAMP BIAS to restore level.



                                        -3-


                                                                APPENDIX 16
                                                                22 August 1989          
                   Pollak Counter Operator Pre-Flight Tasks

Flight No:-

Date     :-

Operator :-

                                                                              

NB             Enter the time of completion of each task

               This check list must be handed to the Aircraft Scientist before
               Take Off


No                                 Task                              Time     

1         Date of last soaking of counter

2         Operator log loaded on aircraft

3         Packet of 0.45 æm filters loaded on aircraft

4         Check integrity of airline connection to sample
          port

5         Check sample pump is operational

6         Check filter is intact and clean and filter
          retaining plate is in position

7         Check lamp output is normal and maintained by
          feedback

8         Check working pressure held to within 2mm Hg over
          one minute

9         Check expansion achieved and surface CN
          concentration normal













                                        -4-

                                                                      
