                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989
                   MRF HERCULES INERTIAL NAVIGATION SYSTEM

FERRANTI FIN 1012 INS

USER'S NOTES                                          (Version 3, March 1988)


A1.  General

1.   The FIN 1012 INS is a self-contained navigational system capable of
operating within the latitude limits of 89.5oN and 89.5oS.  On the MRF
Hercules it is installed primarily for experimental purposes but it is also
used by the aircrew as a navigation aid.  An a/c scientist requiring to use
the Control and Display Unit should ensure that the Navigator is aware of this
requirement.

2.   The IN Equipment consists of two main units:-

     i)   the Inertial Navigation Unit (INU), containing the inertial
     platform, power supplies, electronic and computer cards and input/output
     interface circuits.

     ii)  the Inertial Navigation Control and Display Unit (INCDU), containing
     the operators controls and displays, and its own power supply.  See
     Figure 1.

3.   The INU (H430) is mounted, with its cooling fan, in the nose boom bay. 
     The INCDU (H432) and a monitor panel (H437) are installed at the
     navigator's station.

A2.  Inputs and Outputs

4.   For normal operation the equipment requires only one data input -
     barometric altitude.  This is supplied from a transducer, the Baro Unit
     (H431), in the nose boom bay and a height generator box (H433) near the
     navigator's position.  The equipment will function without the barometric
     input but at reduced accuracy.

5.   The INCDU provides outputs of velocities, position, heading and attitude
     together with the equipment's status on its displays.

6.   The INU ouputs the aircraft's velocity in 3 axes, the aircraft's attitude
     in terms of heading, roll and pitch, and a status word, to the Data
     Recording System (DRS).

7.   The aircraft heading (true) is also displayed on a Heading Indicator at
     the navigator's station, and is supplied to the doppler radar system's
     aerial.

8.   Lamps indicating "IN good in navigation mode", and "IN fault" are
     positioned on the monitor panel and near the flight leader's position in
     the Van.  The navigator also has a meter indicating the platform
     temperature and a LED to indicate that the cooling fan is powered.
                                        -1-


                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989
A3.  Principles of Operation

9.   Inertial navigation is based on the ability of the accelerometer to
     measure accelerations along the line of its sensitive axes, and the
     ability of the gyroscope to detect rotational changes.
10.  Three accelerometers are aligned north, east and vertically (with respect
     to the local gravity vector).  They are maintained in this alignment on
     their stabilised platform, independently of aircraft movement, by
     mounting gyroscopes on the platform and by placing the instrument cluster
     in a gimbal arrangement, and using 3 servo loops to correct any
     misalignment.

11.  Corrections are applied for movement over the curved surface of the
     earth, the earth's rotation, the effect of gravitational, centrifugal and
     coriolis forces.

12.  The accelerations measured in 3 axes (north, east and vertical) are
     integrated to give velocities and the velocities are integrated to give
     increments of distance.  The horizontal increments update known
     coordinates to give latitude and longitude.  The vertical increment is
     compared with the barometric derived term and a correction is fed back to
     the vertical velocity.

13.  The aircraft attitude in terms of heading, roll and pitch are digitised
     from signals read from the appropriate gimbal's synchro.

B1.  Operation

B2.  Switch On

14.  a)   The ideal INS Bay temperature is between +25oC and +30oC.  The
     Heater and Blower switches at the Navigator's station should be selected
     to bring the Bay temperature to this range as quickly as possible bearing
     in mind the ambient conditions.

     b)   During the Alignment period the INS Bay temperature meter should be
     monitored and if +20oC is not reached, or +30oC is exceeded, an attempt
     to correct the temperature should be made by using the Heater and Blower
     switches as appropriate.  The INS Bay should be stabilised automatically
     at +30OC by the flamestat.  If this does not appear to be occurring
     report as a fault.

     c)   Ensure INCDU Mode Selector is to the OFF position.

     d)   Verify that the following circuit breakers are closed:-









                                        -2-

                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989

15.            Pilot's CB panels

               MRF LH AC BUS - INERTIAL NAV. FANS SUPPLY, PHASE A, B and C
               (Green cap).
               
               MRF LH AC BUS - INERTIAL NAV. RAPID HT., PHASE A, B and C

               MRF LH AC BUS - INCDU LIGHTS (MONITOR PANEL AC SUPPLY)

               ISOLATED DC BUS - INERTIAL NAVIGATOR (green cap)

               ESS. AC BUS - NAV HEADING IND. PHASE A (green cap)

16.            Co-pilot's CB panels

               MRF MAIN DC BUS - IN NAV AC UNIT GROUND CONTROL

               MRF MAIN DC BUS - INERTIAL NAVIGATION HEIGHT GEN (Green cap)
               MRF MAIN DC BUS - INERTIAL NAVIGATION MONITOR PANEL (Green cap)

17.  e)   Select NORM on Alignment Selector (unless doing a calibration
     alignment).

     f)   Select IPI on MODE Selector.  Status Indicator LH digit = 7.

     g)   The Rapid Heaters are now energised.  The HTR lamp will be on and
     will flash if the platform temperature is below +5oC.  The HTR lamp will
     go off when operating temperature is reached.

     h)   The INS should be left in IPI mode until the IN Bay temperature
     meter has reached +20oC AND the INU TEMP meter (on H437 Monitor Panel)
     has stabilised at +55oC and is "pulsing", OR 20 minutes has elapsed since
     the HTR lamp went out.

     i)   Insertion of Present Position and/or Heading can be made, if
     necessary, at any time during this period.

     j)   When the conditions in paragraph 3h) have been reached (and this
     will depend on the ambient conditions) the Mode Selection switch may be
     moved to ALN.  The LH Status Indicator will = 6; this reduces during
     alignment.

     k)   Sometime during the period when ALN is selected move the Display
     Selector switch to "I".  On the keypad enter 72104 followed by ENT.  The
     upper display will show 72104 and the lower display will show the value
     of the Vertical Velocity (Vz) parameter.  The correct display should be a
     single value which decreases towards 1E/2W as the alignment proceeds.  If
     this is the case the alignment may continue as normal.




                                        -3-


                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989

     l)   If the lower display should be switching between two large values
     with the E and W lamps being illuminated alternately a fault condition
     exists.  The Mode Selector switch should be moved to OFF.  Wait at least
     3 minutes then carry out the actions of paras 3b) to 3k).

     m)   Check that the Height Generator box (H433) is ON (Green LED
     illuminated).  The red LED and associated switch are a test facility
     which inserts zero feet into the INU.  If the red LED is illuminated
     cancel it by operating the adjacent switch.  The INU requires the baro.
     input to be present before the alignment mode is entered.

B3   Initial Position Insertion (IPI)

18.  a)   With Display Selector at PP enter Latitude (51o 16.7'N for RAE) by
     pressing N (or S) followed by coordinates.  Data is displayed on upper
     panel.  If wrong press CLR, if correct press ENT.

     b)   Enter Longitude (00o 46.8'W for RAE) in a similar manner.  Data is
     displayed on lower panel.  Leading zeros need not be entered, trailing
     zeros must be entered.

     c)   Select HDG/DR on Display Selector, enter heading, if displayed value
     on upper panel is not within 5o of the best estimate of true heading, on
     the keyboard buttons.  If data in upper panel correct then press ENT,
     otherwise press CLR and re-enter.

19.  Switching to IPI initiates the Built In Test program which then runs
automatically until the IN is switched off.  If a fault is detected a digit
will be displayed in the RH Status Indicator.  See Table 2.

20.  Occasionally 77 will be displayed when IPI is selected.  Switch to OFF
and back to IPI (known fault).

B4.  Alignment

21.  The preferred method is the Double Alignment procedure as follows:-

     a)   After rapid heat is completed, and any insertions made at IPI,
     select ALN on the Mode Selector switch.  The LH Status Indicator
     will = 6; this reduces during the alignment.  See Table 2.

     b)   After 12 minutes in Align select NAV for 1 minute (to torque out
     heading error).  Heading display may vary during the Align procedure.

     c)   Reselect ALN for as long as possible; 7 minutes; or until
     LH digit = 0; depending on the time available.

     d)   During the alignment carry out the check in Section B2. paras k)
     and l).



                                        -4-


                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989
B5.  Navigate

22.  When alignment is complete, and before moving the aircraft, the Mode
Selector is moved to NAV.  This switch position is guarded and the switch must
be pushed before turning to or from NAV.  The green "IN good in Nav. Mode"
light should illuminate and the LH Status Indicator digit go blank.

23.  This is the normal operating mode of the INS.

24.  The data available is shown in Table 3, and is selected for display by
the Display Selector swtich.

25.  Additional data can be displayed by use of the Program Inspect facility. 
A table of program inspect addresses can be found in Table 5.  The Display
Selector is moved to I and the address entered on the keys followed by ENT. 
The data displayed on the lower panel requires scaling by the factor shown in
Table 5.

26.  Parameters from the IN data stream (see Table 4) are recorded on the DRS
and may be displayed independently on the DRS monitor or the Real Time
Display.

27.  Destination (Waypoint) coordinates may be entered in NAV mode, or
changed, if entered earlier.  Steering information to destinations is
displayed by suitable combinations of the Display Selector and the Destination
Selector toggle switch.

C1.  Flight

28.  The present position can be updated when overflying known coordinates by
pressing the FIX button and entering known position.  Note - this action
invalidates the post-flight Gyro Drift Update facility (see later).  Present
Position will not normally be updated on experimental sorties.
Note that the INCDU provides an alternative source of Ground Speed and Drift
information, of particular use when Doppler data is not available.

29.  The Mode Selector switch should NEVER be moved to the T (test) position
during flight.

C2.  Faults

30.  Fault conditions within the IN equipment are indicated by a digit in the
Right Hand Status Indicator (see Table 2).  The amber "INS fault" lamp should
light (except for some power supply faults).

31.  The action taken depends on the fault indicated and the mission.  For
example, Fault 5 (INCDU) may leave good data being recorded on DRS, and the
flight could continue.

32.  Certain power supply faults, overheating of the platform, and gyro faults
will cause an Automatic Switch-Off.  The amber "INS fault" lamp should light
and the INCDU will go blank.

                                        -5-


                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989
33.  As circuits within the IN remain energised the equipment should be
switched to OFF manually.

34.  Whenever the INS is switched OFF in the air, the aircraft should be flown
Straight and Level for 3 minutes, if possible.

35.  Do NOT attempt to re-align in flight.

36.  The sortie may continue after switch off with no restrictions.

D1.  Post Flight

D2.  Gyro Drift Updating

37.  1.   Note on the pro-forma the Present Position as displayed
     2.   Note the Inspect Addresses 71117(Vn), 71115(Ve), 72104(Vz)
     3.   Carry out a Gyro Drift Update by:-

          a)   Pressing the FIX button (Status Indicator = 9) and insert the
               park position co-ordinates.

          b)   Setting the Mode Selector to ALN (Status Indicator = 5).

          c)   Setting the Display Selector to G (Y and Z drifts displayed).

          d)   Pressing the FIX button - updated values of Y and Z gyro drifts
               displayed.

          N.B. X gyro drift term is not modified.

          e)   Noting new Y and Z values on the pro-forma.

     4.   Switch off the INS.

D3.  Switch Off

38.  Select OFF on the Mode Selector.

39.  Pull all green capped CBs made in Paragraphs B2, 15 and 16.

40.  THE INU (or the aircraft) SHOULD NOT BE MOVED UNTIL AT LEAST 3 MINUTES
HAVE ELAPSED SINCE SWITCH OFF.  
This prevents possible expensive damage to the Platform from excessive rates
of rotation.

D4.  Standby

41.  This mode is provided so that the instrument cluster may be maintained
above +5oC using minimum power.  Only 28V dc supply is required.  Cooling air
(fan) is not necessary during this mode.

                                        -6-


                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989
E1.  Servicing

42.  Pre-flight servicing (sections B1-B4 above) will normally be carried out
by Aircraft Department.

43.  Corrective maintenance will be normally carried out by MRF Electronics
Section who will consult with Ferranti plc, Silverknowes, Edinburgh, as
necessary.  Normally servicing will be restricted to card replacement.

44.  Calibration alignments will be carried out by RAE Aircraft Department, or
MRF Electronics Section, after consultation.

E3.  Safety

45.  The INU must NOT be moved until at least 3 minutes have elapsed since the
equipment was switched off, as the platform could be damaged.

46.  If switched off in flight the aircraft should be flown straight and level
for 3 minutes, if possible.

47.  There are no restrictions on flight manoeuvres with the INS powered or
unpowered.

48.  The equipment uses lethal voltages - applicable safety procedures should
be taken.

49.  The INU power supply pack contains a Lithium battery - see Hazard Notes
in AP112J-0310-1A before removing.

F1.  Bibliography

50.  AP101B-0702-1, Cover 2, Part L, Section XXVI (AL8, Nov 75) Hercules
W Mk 2 Aircraft Servicing Manual.

51.  ISD661/D1 Operator's Guide for FIN 1012 I.N. Equipment (Nimrod)
Issue 1 -  Ferranti.

52.  AP112J-0310-1A Nimrod Aircraft Inertial Navigation System (FIN 1012)
General and Technical Information.

53.  AP112J-0310-10 Nimrod Aircraft Invertial Navigation System (FIN 1012)
Servicing diagrams.

54.  MRF Internal Note No 9 The measurement of flight level wind and aircraft
position by the MRF Hercules (S Nicholls).



W J Gilchrist
Head of Electronics Section
Met Research Flight

8 March 1988
                                        -7-


                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989
D/Met O (MRF)/3/5/1
7 March 1988

Electronics Section Instruction 3/88

                                HERCULES XV208

                            FIN 1012 INS ALIGNMENT

1.   Experience with the FIN 1012 INS has shown that when the Alignment
procedure is carried out before the platform has become thoroughly warm the
Vertical Velocity (Vz) parameter is not "captured" and the resulting data is
unusable.

2.   The Switch On procedure is, therefore, modified to overcome this fault.

3.   Switch On

     a)   The ideal INS Bay temperature is between +25oC and +30oC.  The
     Heater and Blower switches at the Navigator's station should be selected
     to bring the Bay temperature to this range as quickly as possible bearing
     in mind the ambient conditions.

     b)   During the Alignment period the INS Bay temperature meter should be
     monitored and if +20oC is not reached, or +30oC is exceeded, an attempt
     to correct the temperature should be made by using the Heater and Blower
     switches as appropriate.  The INS Bay should be stabilised automatically
     at +30oC by the flamestat.  If this does not appear to be occurring
     report as a fault.

     c)   Ensure INCDU Mode Selector is to the OFF position.

     d)   Verify that the following circuit breakers are closed:-

               Pilot's CB panels

               MRF LH AC BUS - INERTIAL NAV. FANS SUPPLY, PHASE A, B and C
               (Green cap).
               
               MRF LH AC BUS - INERTIAL NAV. RAPID HT., PHASE A, B and C

               MRF LH AC BUS - INCDU LIGHTS (MONITOR PANEL AC SUPPLY)

               ISOLATED DC BUS - INERTIAL NAVIGATOR (green cap)

               ESS. AC BUS - NAV HEADING IND. PHASE A (green cap)

               Co-pilot's CB panels

               MRF MAIN DC BUS - IN NAV AC UNIT GROUND CONTROL
               MRF MAIN DC BUS - INERTIAL NAVIGATION HEIGHT GEN (Green cap)
               MRF MAIN DC BUS - INERTIAL NAVIGATION MONITOR PANEL (Green cap)

                                        -8-


                                                                APPENDIX 5
                                                                21 August 1989

     e)   Select NORM on Alignment Selector (unless doing a calibration
     alignment).

     f)   Select IPI on MODE Selector.  Status Indicator LH digit = 7.

     g)   The Rapid Heaters are now energised.  The HTR lamp will be on and
     will flash if the platform temperature is below +5oC.  The HTR lamp will
     go off when operating temperature is reached.

     h)   The INS should be left in IPI mode until the IN Bay temperature
     meter has reached +20oC AND the INU TEMP meter (on H437 Monitor Panel)
     has stabilised at +55oC and is "pulsing", OR 20 minutes has elapsed since
     the HTR lamp went out.

     i)   Insertion of Present Position and/or Heading can be made, if
     necessary, at any time during this period.

     j)   When the conditions in paragraph 3h) have been reached (and this
     will depend on the ambient conditions) the Mode Selection switch may be
     moved to ALN.  The LH Status Indicator will = 6; this reduces during
     alignment.

     k)   Sometime during the period when ALN is selected move the Display
     Selector switch to "I".  On the keypad enter 72104 followed by ENT.  The
     upper display will show 72104 and the lower display will show the value
     of the Vertical Velocity (Vz) parameter.  The correct display should be a
     single value which decreases towards 1E/2W as the alignment proceeds.  If
     this is the case the alignment may continue as normal.

     l)   If the lower display should be switching between two large values
     with the E and W lamps being illuminated alternately a fault condition
     exists.  The Mode Selector switch should be moved to OFF.  Wait at least
     3 minutes then carry out the actions of paras 3b) to 3k).

5.   The MRF Hercules'Inertial Navigation System User's Notes have been
amended.  The current issue is Version 3, March 1988.


W J Gilchrist
Head of Electronics Section
MRF
Distribution:
Head of Facilities
FLO
Aircraft Dept. RAE (2)
OC MRF RAF
Flight Leader's Instructions
WJG
DWA
JGL
PWT
File
                                        -9-
                                                                      
