
                                                               APPENDIX 23
                                                               21 October 1988 
                 STATIC AND PITOT-STATIC PRESSURE TRANSDUCERS

Circuit Breakers Required

JB1 28V DC Supply, INS Bay.

PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION

STATIC:  A pressure is transmitted to a sensing diagphragm.  The position of
the sensing diaphragm is detected by capacitor plates on both sides of the
diaphragm.  An oscillator excites the capacitive sensing capsule in a manner
such that the oscillator voltage/frequency product is a linear function of the
sensed pressure.  The detector circuit then converts this signal into a low
level DC signal which is then amplified.  The output voltage from the sensor
enters the signal conditioning box which converts the sensor output (0-10V) to
a range between (0-10V).  The voltage output from the signal conditioning box
then enters the A-D board which converts it to DRS units which are recorded on
the DRS (Parameter 8).  The software applies the 3LC equation to obtain
pressure in MBs.

PITOT-STATIC:  Two pressures are transmitted through isolating diaphragms to a
sensing diaphragm.  The displacement of the sensing diaphragm is proportional
to the pressure differential across it, detected as above.  The sensor output
signal is processed as above but recorded as parameter 9.  The software
applies the 3LC equation to the DRS units to obtain indicated and true air
speed in knots or metres/second.

PRE-FLIGHT

1.   Check Nose Probe Pitot and Static vents are clear and undamaged.
2.   Engineer checks Nose Probe de-icing heater working.

IN FLIGHT

1.   Check Pitot and Static transducers working, within the DRS in-flight
     checks - at least twice.
2.   After take-off Engineer switches Nose Probe Heaters ON.
3.   Before landing Engineer switches Nose Probe Heaters OFF.

POST FLIGHT

1.   Check Nose Probe Pitot and Static vents are clear and undamaged.
2.   After low level flights over the sea the Nose Boom should be sprayed with
distilled water then methylated spirit to clear any salt deposits.  During
winter use meths. only.

NB.  The circuit breaker on MRF LH AC BUS labelled Pressure Sensor Supply does
not isolate the new pressure transducers.  The circuit breaker is part of the
wiring to the old pressure transducers which was left so that the old
transducers could be put back on the aircraft if the new ones failed.



                                        -1-

                                                                         
