
                                                                APPENDIX 27
                                                             14th November 1995
                      HEIMANN  RADIATION  THERMOMETER


Circuit Breakers Required

MRF Main Distribution Panel: a)  28V JB4B & JB3B supply     
                             b)  115V JB4B & JB3B supply    
                             c)  200V JB4B & JB3B supply    
                             d)  230V JB4B & JB3B supply    
                       JB3B: a)  28V, Heimann              
                             b)  115V, Radtherm            
                             c)  230V, Rack 2   
                   Rear Van: a)  JB4B, 28V DC Barnes        
                             b)  JB4B, Barnes 0.5A Fuse     
                                                    
                     
Principles of Operation

The instrument measures the intensity of Infra-Red radiation incident within
it's cone of acceptance and weighted according to it's spectral pass band
(nominally 8-14µm).

The blackbody assembly is essentially a temperature controlled cylindrical
cavity, bored in a rectangular aluminium block, which is thermally insulated. 
It contains an in-line optical system that collects, filters and focuses the
in-coming radiation onto a thermistor bolometer.

In front of the blackbody cavity is an optical chopper, which is a highly
reflective three bladed disc.  As the chopper blade rotates, the thermistor
bolometer alternately detects the in-coming radiation and that of the
blackbody cavity.  Therefore the output of the thermistor bolometer consists
of voltage pulses, the frequency of which is equal to the chopping rate and
the peak-to-peak amplitude is proportional to the difference between the two
radiation levels.  Since the blackbody cavity radiation is known the absolute
value of the in-coming radiation can be determined, assuming that there is no
radiating or absorbing material between the source and the instrument.

It is necessary to calibrate the instrument in-flight due to instrument drift
and non-linearity.  This is achieved with a Calibration Target mounted on a heat
sink which can be moved in or out of the field-of-view of the blackbody cavity,
by an actuator.  The actuator is controlled remotely from the Program Selector
Panel in the front Van, as is the Calibration Target's temperature.
The Target's temperature can be raised or lowered within the range +40.0 to
-20.0 Deg C.  Therefore by  placing the Target into the field-of-view of the
blackbody cavity, the difference in temperature between that detected by the
thermistor bolometer and that set for the Calibration Target gives a correction
to be applied to the instrument.  Thus the instrument can be calibrated over a
selected operating range.       
  
The Calibration Target temperature signal is output by the Calibration Control
Unit. (0 to 10V corresponds to the temperature range of  -20 to +40 degrees).
This signal is input to MILLIE on PL2 (upper plug), Channel 9.  It is recorded
by the DRS as Parameter 142, PRTC.
The Heimann signal, also 0 to 10V (corresponding to temperature range -50 to
+50 degrees) is input to MILLIE on PL2, Channel 12.  It is recorded by the DRS
as Parameter 141, PRTT.
                                   -1-

                                                                APPENDIX 27
                                                             14th November 1995


Signal Register - The relay in the Calibration Control Unit which controls the 
actuator, also sends a contact closure signal to MILLIE.  This is then recorded
on the DRS as Bit 0 of Parameter 27 (SREG). 
(Bit Low = Measure, Bit High = Calibrate).  
                  
The assumption that there is no radiating or absorbing material between the
source and the instrument is not valid in-flight.  This is because the depth 
of air that the in-coming radiation traverses:- 
  (i) changes between monitoring cloud top and sea surface temperatures
 (ii) alters with altitude.  
Therefore the  end-user of the data has to compensate for this using the
in-flight calibration data.


Pre-flight

1.   With AII converters ON:
          a)   Make Barnes CB, JB4B.   
          b)   Switch ON CALIBRATION CONTROL UNIT, 230V and 115V
          c)   Make HEIMANN CB, JB3B.

2.   Check Calibration Control Unit Display shows cal and meas temperatures.
         
3.   OPEN Heimann Doors - by rotating "T" handle clockwise, out of gate, and
     lowering - two clicks are felt.
     
4.   Check temperature control functions program (eg. 8), from the Program
     Selector Panel.  The Reference signal can be monitored as DRS Parameter 
     142, (0-4095 DRSU  =  -20 to +40 deg).
                                         
5.   Check Bit 0 on Parameter 27 changes from Low to High when a Program is
     run. 
     
6.   Outside - Check both doors are UP and Locked and Germanium window is 
     clean and undamaged.
     
7.   If time allows, visually check that the Calibration Target slides to the 
     Calibrate position when selected (eg. RUN Program 15).
     
8.   Leave doors open (in case of icing) and in Calibrate position (to protect
     the window) for take-off.

NB.  If no power to Calibration Control Unit, check cable at top of rack 2 has 
     been reconnected to the 230V outlet, after pre-flight 2-D calibrations.


                                        -2-

                                                                APPENDIX 27
                                                             14th November 1995
In-flight

1.   After take-off press RESET on the Program Selector Panel, this moves the
     Calibration Target to the Measure position.

2.   Calibrations should only be done when in level flight.  After ascent or
     descent, allow at least 2 minutes for the instrument to stabilise before
     a calibration is carried out.
     
     a)   On the thumbwheel switches, dial up the Program No. corresponding to 
          the temperature range required.
     b)   Press "RUN" to start the calibration, (Green light OFF, Red light ON)
     c)   When the calibration is finished, the Target automatically moves to 
          the Measure position.  (Green light ON, Red light OFF)

3.   During calibration the Flight Leader can check the Heimann and Calibration
     Target temperatures on the DRS if time allows:

                             DRS units         Temperature
        Heimann (141)    :  0000 - 4095     -50.0 to + 50.0 deg
        Cal. Target (142):  0000 - 4095     -20.0 to + 40.0 deg

4.   When on task and at approximately 30 minute intervals (if the flight
     pattern allows), carry out a calibration covering a range of temperatures
     either side of the observed actual temperatures. 
     Ideally, calibrations should be done at the end of runs.  This gives the
     instrument time to settle at the ambient temperature.
     
5.   ON ALL EXPERIMENTAL RUNS ENSURE HEIMANN in MEASURE MODE (green light on).

6.   Before landing:
     a)   Break Heimann CB, JB3B
     b)   Close Heimann Doors (pull "T" handle UP - two clicks - rotate   
          clockwise into gate and lock                                   
     c)   Switch Calibration Control Unit OFF (230V and 115V)
     
       
                                        -3-

