APPENDIX VIII - Pre/In Flight Procedures

Cloud Condensation Nucleus Counter Pre/In Flight Procedures.

Introduction


Before each flight on which the CCN counter is required a set procedure should 
be followed to ensure that the system is ready.
The day before a flight ensure that the instrument is fitted. If it has not 
been used for several flights or has just been re-fitted it should be prepared 
as if for flight and tested. At the same time the alleviator should be tested 
for serviceability.

1.0) Preparation

     Refer to Fig 1 which shows the general layout of the CCNC as a plan view 
     from above and Fig 2, an exploded view of the chamber.

1.1) Undo the Dzus fasteners to the lid of the CCNC box. Lift the lid from the 
     front and hinge it up and back towards the fuselage. A web from the 
     aircraft soundproofing may be removed and placed over one of the Dzus 
     fasteners to hold the lid in the raised position.
    [Undo the Zero Clearance Swagelock fitting connected to the top of the 
     chamber. This should be finger tight.]

     Undo the three large Dzus fasteners on the top plate cover. These should 
     be removed in a clockwise order, starting from the one nearest the LCD 
     on the front of the box. Whilst undoing each fastener apply downward 
     pressure to the cover and retain this pressure until all three have been 
     loosened, when the cover may be carefully removed. Lift the cover taking 
     care not to snag anything with the long Dzus fasteners which will dangle 
     down. Place the cover to one side taking care not to displace the magnet 
     which is fixed to the underside of the cover on the rear right arm.


1.2) Lift the top plate vertically until it is clear of the side walls of the 
     chamber. Note that it is connected via a flexible tube and cable to the 
     CCN counter so should not be completely removed from the box. Turn it 
     over and rest it on the camera cover such that the tubing and wire are 
     not stretched. Check that the O-ring in the zero clearance fitting on the 
     top plate is not dislodged. There are also two large O-rings on the upper 
     and lower surfaces of the top plate. Check that these are not displaced.


1.3) If the CCN Counter has been used on a flight since the upper and lower 
     plate surface blotting papers were changed then the old papers should be 
     removed by carefully lifting the edges with a screwdriver and lifted out 
     by hand. If on the other hand the papers have just been changed then they 
     may remain in place.



1.4) If the instrument has been left with the papers in place overnight then 
     there will inevitably be some condensation on the chamber wall and on the 
     windows of the various ports. These should be dried off using a cotton 
     bud by carefully wiping each window in turn. Do not use any force. Wipe 
     the walls if there is condensation on them.


1.5) If the papers have been removed, check that the water drain channels in 
     the lower plate and the associated air and water ports are also clear.

1.6) Place new blotting papers centrally on the lower and upper plates. The 
     upper plate does not have any physical locating position but it should be 
     placed such that it covers all four air vents equally. Note that these 
     will shortly be exposed by cutting away the paper which covers them.

1.7) When dry the papers will normally sit on the upper and lower plates with 
     a slight bow, such that the whole surface is not in contact with the 
     plate. This will be corrected when the plate is moistened. Half fill the 
     syringe with its blunted needle with distilled or de-ionised water. Place 
     a drop at a time around the outer edge of the lower plate blotting paper 
     taking care not to drip water on the windows. When a complete circle of 
     drops has been placed around the outer edge repeat inside this outer 
     circle and continue until the whole surface has been covered. The idea is 
     to moisten the entire surface. If the paper is still not attached to the 
     lower plate carefully push it down using the needle of the syringe taking 
     care not to pierce the paper especially over the water drainage channels.

     Repeat this process for the upper plate.

1.8) If this is a new blotting paper, the inlet air vents must be uncovered on 
     the upper plate. This is achieved by cutting the paper away over the 
     vents using a screwdriver or similar. Ensure that there is no trace of 
     paper in the air vents.

1.9) If not already done the windows on the chamber wall should now be 
     cleaned/dried using a clean, dry cotton bud. Carefully wipe all four 
     windows until they are clean and dry.

1.10)Check that the O-ring on the underside of the top plate is intact and in 
     place in its groove. Carefully turn the top plate over and holding it by 
     the air inlet pipe only, place it vertically above the chamber wall with 
     the inlet port and water inlet aligned above their respective cutouts in 
     the chamber wall. Slowly lower the top plate into place ensuring that it 
     slides down to meet the ledge on the chamber wall. Do not force it at 
     this stage as it may bind on the chamber wall and become extremely 
     difficult to release.

1.11)The water supply to the top plate may need priming by dropping water from 
     the syringe onto the cotton wool. Gauging the correct amount of water to 
     drip onto the cotton wool is a matter of experience. There should be 
     enough water to thoroughly moisten the whole of the cotton wool without 
     it swimming in water. If too much water is placed on the cotton wool it 
     will simply drip through to the lower plate and maybe flood the chamber, 
     which is obviously undesirable.

1.12)As a rough guide never use more than about 4 ml to moisten the cotton 
     wool unless wetting it from completely dry. Usually about 2 ml should be 
     sufficient.
1.13)Check that the O-ring on the top of the top plate is in place in its 
     groove.

1.14)Check that the magnet is still correctly attached to the top plate cover. 
     If not, it should be found and re-attached. A spare has been placed in 
     the pre-flight case.

1.16)Take the top plate cover and examine its top surface. Through one of the 
     arms a locating hole has been drilled. When correctly assembled this hole 
     will align with the peg on the top of the top plate. Hold the cover over 
     the top plate with the peg and hole correctly orientated with the Dzus 
     fasteners dangling down. Carefully lower the cover such that the Dzus 
     fasteners drop through their holes in the base of the chamber. If they do 
     not all fall into their holes the fasteners may be manipulated later. 
     Ensure that the peg on top of the top plate is aligned with the hole in 
     the cover and that the cover is sitting squarely on the top plate. Check 
     that the Dzus fasteners are in their respective holes in the base of the 
     chamber.

1.17)The Dzus fasteners should now be done up. Never use any tool to apply a 
     mechanical advantage whilst fastening a Dzus fastener. If it will not do 
     up, there is something wrong. Applying too much force will inevitably 
     break something. This process requires a certain amount of dexterity.,

     The favoured operation is to firstly ensure that the Dzus fasteners are 
     exactly vertical. This ensures that there is the shortest distance 
     between the cover and the base of the chamber. This can be achieved 
     initially, by looking at the fastener nearest to the LCD display and 
     rotating the top plate/cover in the appropriate direction. When this 
     alignment has been completed, a more accurate measure of the alignment 
     may be found by applying slight vertically downward pressure to the cover 
     with the left hand and with the right hand start to engage the rear right 
     Dzus fastener by turning it clockwise. Note the position of the Dzus 
     fastener head at the point it starts to engage. Disengage the fastener. 
     Rotate the top plate/cover slightly in a clockwise or anti-clockwise 
     direction. Repeat the above procedure to engage the fastener. The idea is 
     to find the position of the top plate/cover where the fastener starts to 
     engage with the largest amount of turn on the head of the fastener. This 
     will guarantee that the top plate/cover is in the correct orientation 
     relative to the chamber lower plate and that the rest of the fasteners 
     may be secured.

     If this procedure is not completed it will be very difficult, if not 
     impossible to correctly fasten the Dzus fasteners. Once the rear right 
     Dzus fastener has been done up, whilst still applying pressure to the 
     centre of the cover, (it will have a tendency to lift which should be 
     resisted), fasten the left, rear fastener. If this fastener will not do 
     up, it may mean that one or both O-rings on the top plate have become 
     dislodged from their grooves. If this is suspected remove the cover and 
     top plate as described above to check the O-rings. If all seems well try 
     the assembly process again.


     Once the second fastener has been done up, the third one should be 
     fastened using the same technique as the previous fastener.

     If the ambient air temperature is low then the fasteners are usually 
     quite easy to do up. Conversely as the temperature rises they become 
     harder due to thermal expansion of the chamber assembly.

1.18)If the instrument is to be tested on the aircraft with the inlet pipe 
     connected to the alleviator, do not at this stage connect the top plate 
     zero clearance fitting. If all tests have been completed this fitting 
     should be done up finger tight.

2.0) Switching On

2.1) Make the 28 V dc and the 115 V ac breakers on the junction box above and 
     to the right of the CCNC (JB3B) by pressing them in until they click and 
     stay in.

2.2) On the CCNC electronics unit to the left of the chamber box, the three 
     phase 115 V, the separate A phase 115 V and the 28 Vdc indicators should 
     be lit.,

2.3) Ensure the Peltier cooler switch is set ON. This is a locked switch and 
     requires a pull along the toggle axis to release its lock.

2.4) Turn the key switch on the front of the electronics unit to ON. The 9115 
     Vdc and the 5 Vdc indicators should light. The CPU Error light will 
     flash for a few seconds until the software which holds it off is set 
     up and running in the main program. The software in the CCNC chamber box 
     will auto-boot and messages should appear on the LCD indicating that the 
     processor has started. The LCD will eventually show the menu below:-

               8u--------------------------------o 
               [                
               1                                1
                 10 Zero Check      7 RUN        
               81                                1
                 11 Set time        8 RUN S/D    
               81                                1
                 12 Temperatures    9 S/D        
               81                                1
                 13 Pump            B Brighter   
               81                                1
                 14 Graphics        D Darker     
               81                                1
                 15 Camera          E Diagnostics
               81                                1
                 16 Alleviator      F Test       
               81                                1
                                          1083123
               81                                1
                                                
               m--------------------------------.




12.5) If there is no display, but the indicators show that all is well, press 
     and hold the "D" key on the keypad. This has the effect of darkening the 
     display in normal use, but it also has a side effect of resetting its 
     controller which will probably clear the fault.
,
2.6) If the CPU Error light continues to flash next to the LCD, the display 
     may also show the message - "Stepper Error" or other error message. If 
     this is the case switch the CCN counter off with the key, wait a few 
     seconds and switch it back on. Generally this will clear the fault. If 
     there is a persistent fault hold in the CLR key while switching the 
     counter on. Keep the key held in until the main menu appears when a more 
     detailed search into the problem may be conducted using the diagnostic 
     tools available in Option E


2.7) Go through the options to set the instrument up as described in the CCNC 
     Users Notes.

2.8) If running the instrument on the aircraft set the Alleviator to Manual as 
     described in the Users Notes.

2.9) Set option 9 to "S" for Static Mode.

2.10)Select option 8 to run the counter in Static/Dynamic modes.

2.11)Observe that the instrument cycles through the Static and Dynamic modes a 
     few times, noting the shape of the peaks formed at each temperature step 
     in the Static Mode and the shape of the time series in the Dynamic mode. 
     These shapes will depend on the number and nature of CCN in the immediate 
     vicinity of the air inlet and will differ from day to day or even sample 
     to sample.

2.12)Once these set up steps have been completed the instrument may be 
     switched off by turning the key-switch on the electronics unit 
     anti-clockwise and pulling the 115 Vac and 28 Vdc breakers on the 
     junction box above the CCNC.

2.13)BEFORE CLOSING THE LID ON THE CCNC CONNECT THE ZERO CLEARANCE FITTING TO 
     THE TOP PLATE INLET PIPE. THIS IS VITALLY IMPORTANT. IF THIS IS FORGOTTEN 
     THEN THE AIR SAMPLED THROUGHOUT THE FLIGHT WILL BE CABIN AIR WHICH IS 
     OBVIOUSLY UNDESIRABLE.

2.14)To complete the preparation for flight the alleviator should be checked 
     as in its instructions.

3.0) IN-FLIGHT CONTROL

3.1)[Presently, the CCNC is operated in a manual mode in which all the valve 
     switching and pumping made to the alleviator is performed by operating 
     toggle switches. This has to be coordinated with operations on the CCNC 
     and with the flight pattern. See the alleviator notes on operation of 
     this device.

     To enable a signal indicating the state of the alleviator to be passed to 
     the DRS keys are pressed on the CCNC which initiates a signal which is 
     subsequently recorded on the DRS. These signals relate to when an 
     alleviator sample was started and ended such that the sample of air to be 
     analysed by the CCNC may be coordinated with the rest of the instruments 
     on the aircraft.

     With the CCNC in the manual mode, prompts will be issued for which key to 
     press on the CCNC keypad and operation of the CCNC will be held until the 
     correct key is pressed. Once the appropriate key has been pressed the 
     CCNC control program continues.,

3.2) As soon as possible after take-off, switch the CCNC on as described 
     above. Switch the alleviator on as described in its operating notes.

3.3) When the communication traffic on the intercom has quitened down after 
     the post take-off activity ask the flight leader for permission to open 
     the GASP probe. This permission has to be sought from the Captain via the 
     Flight Leader. Once permission has been gained the GASP probe may be 
     opened. Due to the airflow the probe cap has a strong tendency to move on 
     its own once uncapped. Take care not to let it slam to its rest positions 
     as this could damage the capping system or the probe itself. Bring the 
     capping arm to its rest position slowly, resisting any pressure. Ensure 
     the pip is fully home in whichever position you require the cap to be, 
     i.e. either open or closed.

3.4) The CCNC should be displaying the initial menu as described above. If 
     not, press and hold either the B or D key which has the function of 
     making the LCD Brighter or Darker. As a result it also resets the screen 
     once a second which should clear any problem with the display.

     It is assumed that the instrument has been set up in the Pre-flight 
     checks and set in the correct mode for flight i.e. alleviator setting, 
     pump speeds etc.
,
3.5) From the initial menu set the mode using Option 9 to S by pressing the 
     "9" key and waiting for the "S" to become reverse video. Select Option 8 
     which will start the CCNC in the Static Mode followed by a Dynamic Mode 
     and repeating continuously.
,
3.6) If the alleviator set up in the CCNC (Option 6) has been set to manual 
     the control program will enter a phase in which it is prompting the user 
     for key presses as described above. Press the indicated key to the 
     prompts until the prompt for "All on" is issued. This the starting point 
     in the cycle of analysing a sample of air from the alleviator.

3.7) At the appropriate time place a sample of air in the alleviator from 
     outside and compress it. Refer to the Alleviator operating notes if 
     necessary. When the pump on the Alleviator is switched on, press the 
     prompted key on the CCNC, note the time and height and the fact the 
     alleviator pump has been switched on, in the CCNC log. When the sample 
     has been placed in the Alleviator, when the alleviator pump is switched 
     off, press the appropriate key on the CCNC and note the same items again 
     in the CCNC log.

3.8) Pressing the keys on the CCNC will allow the control program to progress. 
     Once the sample in the alleviator has been pressurised, the sample valve 
     on the alleviator may be opened and the prompted for key pressed. This 
     will initiate the analysis cycle and it will continue for however many 
     temperatures have been selected in the set up.

3.9) During the analysis note down the baseline, reference, supersaturation. 
     Also note the detector peak which appears at the end of each temperature 
     step in reverse video. These notes may be useful during subsequent 
     analysis, if only to confirm when samples were taken and the resulting 
     figures.

3.10)When all the temperatures in the static mode have been completed, the 
     CCNC controller will enter the dynamic mode. At this point it will ask 
     for the CCNC to be Closed to the CCNC. This request should be ignored but 
     the appropriate key pressed. Next it will prompt whether the sample is a 
     new air sample or not. Press the appropriate key for a negative response 
     since the same air sample should be analysed in the Dynamic mode.,

3.11)When the Dynamic mode has been completed the same prompts will appear but 
     on this occasion close the alleviator to the CCNC by moving the Sample 
     switch on the Alleviator control panel to the OFF position. Press the 
     appropriate key on the CCNC to indicate that this operation has been 
     completed.

3.12)To the "New air" prompt, reply in the affirmative. This takes the control 
     program full circle and is in the same state as at the beginning of 
     section 3.7.

3.13)Continue sampling and analysing as required until the end of the flight 
     ensuring that the alleviator is ready for runs specifically planned for 
     the CCNC.

4.0) Calibrations

4.1)[Calibrations may be performed either in the air or on the ground. It is 
     preferable to complete a calibration run during one of the in-flight runs 
     as it will better represent the conditions in which the analyses are 
     performed.

4.2) Well before a calibration is required, remove the camera cover by 
     undoing the 4 bolts with the nut turner provided.

4.3) Check that there is a film loaded in the camera with sufficient film 
     remaining. It takes between 20-30 frames to complete a calibration.

4.4) Switch the camera motorised winder to Continuous using the small 
     thumbwheel under the camera.

4.5) When the calibration is required press C on the keypad until the message 
     "Camera on" appears. This is usually done at the start of an analysis 
     sequence, i.e. at the lowest Static temperature. From now on the control 
     program will initiate a frame expose/advance every time a peak is 
     detected.,





4.6) To detect a peak the software looks for a detector value which 
     is lower than the last recorded value. This may result in a number of 
     frames being exposed during each Static temperature step due to 
     variations in the scattered light from the laser despite there being a 
     user definable dead-time in the peak detection software. For this reason 
     in order to coordinate the frames after the film has been exposed, it is 
     important to add blank frames between each Static step. Another 
     complication is that the software may initiate more frames than the 
     camera can cope with.

4.7) A careful note must be made of the usual parameters of Detector, 
     Baseline, Reference and Supersaturation as well as the frame count 
     recorded by the CCNC controller, the frame count on the camera and the 
     instances of any blank frames.

4.8) During analysis of the developed film any discrepancies between CCNC 
     frame count and Camera frame count may be taken into account.,

4.9) When the calibration has been completed press "C" on the keypad until the 
     message "Camera off" appears. After a slight delay the menu options will 
     re-appear and the "C" should appear as normal indicating that the camera 
     peak detection software has been de-activated.

4.10)Rewind the film in the camera, remove it, place it in a film canister and 
     label the canister with the flight number and the time the film was 
     taken out and that the film contains a CCNC calibration.

4.11)Load a new film in the camera ready for the next calibration.

4.12)Switch the camera auto-winder to OFF.

4.13)Replace the camera cover and its four bolts.



5.0) Pre-Landing Checks


5.1) Before landing check with the Aircraft Scientist/Flight Leader that it 
     is O.K. to close down the CCNC. If so ensure the alleviator actuator is 
     in the CLOSED position. Close the GASP probe, taking care not to let the 
     capping mechanism slam shut as in section 3.3.

5.2) Switch the CCNC keyswitch OFF. Pull the circuit breakers on J/B 3B

5.3) Pull the breaker for the Alleviator.

5.4) Remove the filter papers from the inside of the chamber. Remove all traces
     of moisture from the chamber using a kimwipe. Clean the chamber windows
     with a cotton bud. Close the chamber and then fasten the box lid in place.

5.5) Inform the Flight Leader that the GASP probe has been capped and the CCNC 
     equipment has been shut down and breakers pulled.


