
                                                                APPENDIX 31
                                                                29 August 1989
                                SONDE HANDLER

Pre-flight

1.   Ensure stores below are on board:

     (a)  Sufficient hygristors for quantity of sondes (of same batch), plus
     25% (or 5) spare
     (b)  Tin opener quantity 2
     (c)  Hygristor insertion tool
     (d)  Pair long nose pliers
     (e)  Sondes checked against check list and arranged in launch order in
     sonde stowage
     (f)  Requisite number of frangible sondes (usually 3)
     (g)  Bottle of Electrolube with eye dropper
     (h)  Check list

2.   Before take-off on actual mission

     (a)  Connect all retractor leads.

3.   Before first run insert hygristors in the first five sondes and place
     thermistor into position level with hygristor.  Note hygristor Batch No.

4.   Before handing sonde to ejector check and tick on check list:-

     (a)  Sonde number
     (b)  Retractor connected and lead not fouling opening
     (c)  Hygristor fitted
     (d)  Thermistor correctly placed
     (e)  Remove paper from clothes peg and place a drop of Electrolube on
     contacts with eye dropper.

5.   When sonde is in ejector collect arming pin from ejector operator and
     tick on check sheet.  Be ready to hand pin back if necessary if sonde has
     to be removed from ejector.

6.   When sonde launched place a hygristor in next vacant sonde ie. keeping
     five sondes ready at all times.  For the entensive sonde leg it may be
     better to arm all 11 sondes with hygristors before leg starts.

7.   On completion of sonde dropping phase:

     (a)  Remove any hygristors that may be fitted to any remaining sondes
     (b)  Disconnect retractor leads
     (c)  Ensure paper in clothes peg switches
     (d)  Replace covers on sonde stowage.






                                        -1-                           
