                                                                      
                                                                APPENDIX 7
                                                               28th April 1998

           TELEVISION CAMERAS, MONITORS AND VIDEO RECORDING SYSTEM

                             Forward Facing Camera (FFC)

Circuit breakers required
1.   Co-pilot's DC circuit breaker panel - MRF Main and Ess DC BUS.
     (a)  MRF Power control

2.   Co-pilot's upper circuit breaker panel - Main AC BUS
     (a)  MRF Power - Phase A
     (b)              Phase B
     (c)              Phase C

3.   Recorder Van - JB4A (a) NIPS                                        
                         (b) FFC & Ramp Monitors                     
                         (c) Video Panel                             
                         (d) Altitude Switch Vid. Cntrl (always made)

Pre-flight
1.  On the Video Panel, switch the 28 V and 230 V supplies ON.
2.  On the Video Systems Control Panel - switch Power ON
                                       - switch FFC ON
3.  Switch on the RH TV monitor. 
4.  Switch on Video Timer (upper).
5.  Adjust the colour and contrast as preferred.
                                        
In flight
1.   Adjust pictures as required.

After flight
1.   Switch off the TV Monitor.
2.   Switch off the Video Timer.
3.   At the Video System Control Panel switch OFF (a) FFC 
                                                  (b) Power
4.   On JB4A break : FFC & Ramp Monitors - green circuit breaker.



                               Ramp Television

Circuit Breakers required
1.   Co-pilot's DC circuit breaker panel - MRF Main and Ess DC BUS

2.   Co-pilot's upper circuit breaker panel - Main AC BUS
                                         
3.   Recorder Van JB4A  (a) NIPS                                        
                        (b) FFC & Ramp Monitors                     
                        (c) Video Panel                             
                        (d) Altitude Switch Vid. Cntrl (always made)

Principles of Operation
The camera is mounted vertically on the aircraft ramp and views downwards
through a window.  For rearward vision a 45° prism is attached, outside the
aircraft, and is protected by a fairing.

Both the camera and the prism are provided with a heater/blower for demisting. 
The camera and demister controls are situated in the front compartment of the
van on the Camera Control Panel H172.

The Video Timer must be switched on to pass a picture from the ramp camera to 
monitor.

                                        
Pre-flight
1.   On Video Systems Control Panel - switch Power ON.         
                                    - switch Ramp ON.
2.   Switch Video Timer ON (lower).
3.   Switch LH TV monitor ON.
4.   If required to clear the optics, switch Prism Demisters ON (amber lights). 
     Switch OFF after use and do not run demist for more than 15 minutes unless
     in very cold, damp conditions.

In flight
At high level and/or damp conditions it may be necessary to operate the
camera/prism demist controls.

After flight
1.   Switch  Monitor OFF
2.   Switch  Video Timer OFF
3.   On Video Systems Control Panel - switch RAMP and Power OFF. 



                              TV Monitor Control

Circuit Breakers Required
1.   Co-pilots DC circuit breaker panel MRF Main and ESS DC Bus.
     a)   MRF power control.
2.   Co-pilots upper circuit breaker panel - main AC BUS
     a)   MRF Power - Phase A
     b)               Phase B
     c)               Phase C               
3.   Recorder Van, forward compartment - Junction Box 4A
     a)  NIPS
     b)  FFC & RAMP Monitors
     c)  Video Panel
                                              
Video Systems Control Panel 
1.  Switch Power ON.
2.  Switch FFC / Ramp Camera ON as required.

There are two monitors. The left hand one displays the Ramp Camera picture.
The right hand monitor displays the Forward Facing Camera picture.



                             Video Timer Control
Power
230V 50Hz (AII Inverters)
NIPS
Junction Box 4A Fuse - TV Systems Timer.
                         

Principles of Operation
There are 2 Video Timers, one each to date/time stamp the FFC and Ramp pictures.

Push Button switches are used to count up appropriate month, day, hour and
minute and also to start, stop and reset the clock as required.  Up/Down
switches are available to switch off any pair of characters not required on
the display, and also to control the size of the character in the vertical and
the horizontal.  Rotary controls position the characters horizontally and
vertically and also operate the format, white-black characters.

Pre-flight
1. Switch on both Timers to check TV Cameras and Monitors.
2. Set up month, date, and time characters and start clock in synchronization
   with DRS time.  (The Timers are held up by NIPS during power change-over).

After flight
Switch both Timers OFF.



                             VHS Video Recorder

Circuit Breakers Required
1.   Co-pilots DC circuit breaker panel - MRF Main and Ess DC BUS
     a)   MRF Power control on.
2.   Co-pilots upper circuit breaker panel - Main AC BUS
     a)   MRF Power - Phase A
     b)               Phase B
     c)               Phase C

3.   Cargo Hold, forward bulkhead - MRF Main Distribution Panel
     a)   28V DC JB4A
     b)   200/115v AC (AO) JB4A               

4.   Recorder Van, forward compartment - Junction Box 4A
     a)   NIPS
     b)   28V DC Video Control
     c)   230V   VCR


Switch On                                                          
1.  Switch Video Recorder to ON (2 switches - one is on the front,      
    the other is located near the power cable at LH rear of unit).
2.  Load tape into VCR.

Record Mode
1.   Select Camera position you wish to record (ie. FFC or RAMP).
2.   Ensure Record / Play switch on Video Systems Control Panel set to Record
3.   Press Play AND Record on Video Recorder or Remote Control Unit.   

To Stop
1.   Press STOP on Video Recorder or Remote Control.  
              
Play Mode
1.   Select PLAY on Video Systems Control Panel.
2.   Press PLAY on Video Recorder or Remote Control.

In Flight
1.   The camera position to record should be selected as required.
2.   The Flight Leader should log details of the recording on the Video Tape
     Log kept with that tape ie. start/end times, FFC, DFC, RFC etc.
3.   Annotate video tape box and video tape spine with date and flight number.
N.B. The audio track on the tape records the PA channel off the aircraft
     intercom.

Post Flight
1.   Copy Video Log - put original in tape cover and a copy in Flight Folder.
2.   Store video tape in Computer Room tape store and fill in log book.



                          Video 8  Video Recorders

Circuit Breakers Required - as for VHS Recorder above.

The two Video8 Recorders are positioned next to the TV monitors.  The RH VCR
records the FFC Camera picture and the LH VCR records the Ramp Camera picture.
        
Switch On
1.   Press button on top right of the unit and lift up LCD screen.
2.   Switch Video 8 Power ON.
3.   Press Eject and load Video 8 tape. Push down on front of unit to close.
4.   Press Display to show status on LCD.

Record
1.   Press Record - a dot (recording indicator), appears on the display and the
     counter increments.

To Stop
1.   Press Stop on the Video Recorder.

Play Mode 
1.   Press Play on the Video Recorder.

Pre-Flight
1.   Switch on, load tape and check operation.
2.   Press Menu to show current setup.  Adjust as required with Select and Set
     buttons.  (Normaly Long Play ie. LP mode is selected). Press ENTer to
     leave Menu display.
3.   The Video 8 VCRs are NOT held up during power change-over, so they need to
     be switched on again - press Power, then Display.  
4.   Reset counter.

In Flight
1.   Record as required.
2.   Change tape when approaching 3 hours of recording (LP).
NB:  The counter timer does not differentiate between SP and LP modes.  So,
     for a 90-minute tape, with Long Play selected, the counter will show
     1:30:00 when at the end of the tape, NOT 3:00:00.  BEWARE.
3.   At the very end of the tape, the "record dot" disappears and the
     counter stops incrementing.
4.   As for VHS Recorder - log recording details, label the tapes and boxes.

Post Flight
1.   Copy Video Log - put original in tape box, copy in Flight Folder
2.   Store tapes in Computer Room tape store at Farnborough. Update logbook.  
