
                                                                APPENDIX 29
                                                            26 November 1990

        INSTRUCTIONS FOR OPERATING THE MULTI CHANNEL RADIOMETER (MCR)

Circuit Breakers

     3 CB's on flight deck MRF L.H.A.C.BUS.
     3 CB's on JB6 (rear cargo hold port side).
     1 CB in van JB4A.

Principles of Operation

The multichannel radiometer detects radiation in selected wavelengths and
directions in the solar and terrestrial spectrum.  The instrument consists of
three main units.

1.   The sensor unit contains the optical system and much of the signal
     processing circuitry and is located in the nose-cone of the port
     maxi-pod.
2.   The electronics unit contains the control and timing circuits, analogue
     multiplexer and serial links to the data recoding system, this is located
     in the centre section of the pod.
3.   The control unit is located in the van and is used to control and display
     the functions of the MCR.

The MCR 5" monitor tells the status of the fulter wheels and the mirror
position.  Mirror position is shown on a cartwheel and each position has a
unique number:-

     0 = Black Body (Parking position)
     1 = Zenith
     2 = Cold Black Body
     3 = N60o
     4 = N45o
     5 = N30o
     6 = N15o
     7 = Nadir

The upper and lower shutters are operated by two rocker switches on the
shutter control panel.

The MCR can be operated in essentially two modes with either all filters
rotating or filters fixed in position.  For most situations the first mode of
operation is used.

To fix one or all filter wheels type:
     "Fn" where n is the number of the filter to be fixed then reply with
     either A, B, C, D or any combination of these or the word ALL.
To restart filters type "FE".
To move the mirror type "M" <RETURN> "n", where n is the number of the
position required.

NB: THE MCR SHOULD BE CLOSED COMPLETELY WHEN FLYING IN CLOUD OR RAIN.


                                    - 1 -

                                                                APPENDIX 29
                                                            26 November 1990
A:   Before Flight

1.   Make 3 CB's on flight deck (MRF L.H.A.C.BUS) located to left of aircraft
scientists seat.  These are the MCR heater CB's, stow the red clips in van.

2.   Make 3 CB's on JB6 (rear cargo hold on port side)
          MAXI POD POWER - Power to port maxi-pod 115V 400Hz.
          HBB            - Power to Hot Black Body
          MCR            - Power to mirror motor.

3.   Make MCR CB in van JB4A - power to MCR control unit.

4.   Load two disks into tape drive of MCR control unit
          Disk labelled 0 into bottom drive
          Disk labelled 1 into top drive
     Close tape drives.

5.   Switch on MCR control unit at rocker switch next to tape drive.

6.   Load MCR control programme - see Annex 1.

7.   Open lower shutter and then move mirror to NADIR view.  Tomove mirror
type M <RETURN> followed by number of position required.

8.   Go out to pod and inspect mirror for obvious damage and look up through
MCR pod at upper diffuser plate to check for contamination (note any
contamination in log).  Clean top surface of upper shutter (the diffuser)
carefully - blow dust off first to reduce the risk of scratching the surface. 
Clean with a soft rag or blue tissues with alcohol.

9.   Close shutter and exercise mirror.  Leave mirror on HBB with both
shutters CLOSED.

10.  Select DRS program BCDS.  Parameter 506.

11.  Check that the last two characters in the last line are cycling through
the sequence 00, 55, FF, AA.  This is the filter position monitor and the
display of the correct sequence indicates that the filter wheels are rotating
properly.  Note any irregularities.  If the sequence is incorrect then restart
filters using command "FE".  If problem still persists turn off MCR and
restart process from point A:5.  If the problem still persists after several
minutes of operation then help should be sought.  If the filters are not
rotating properly the data stream will be corrupt. (See Trouble Shooting,
Annex 2.)

12.  Select parameters 501, 502, 503, 504 (Channels A, B, C, D) in turn and
check that the signal ramps are present - 5 points on each.  Note that a
typical ramp should be something like this:-
     2047      1015      1370      1750      1900

The first number on each line is the top of the ramp.  If the magnitude of the
numbers does not follow this order after a few minutes running then restart
MCR from section A:5. (See Trouble Shooting, Annex 2.)
                                    - 2 -


                                                                APPENDIX 29
                                                            26 November 1990
13.  Close both shutters and part mirror on position "O" the HBB.

14.  Prior to power changeover turn off MCR Control Unit and switch by disk
drive.

A:   After Power Transfer

15.  REPEAT STAGES 5 AND 6 (ie. switch on MCR).

C:   During Flight

16.  Filter selection and mirror position will be dictated by the relevant
trial instruction.  Occasionally check as in A: 10-12 that MCR is working. 
Also use HORACE display to check for meaningful data.

17.  DO NOT OPEN THE SHUTTERS IF FLYING IN CLOUD OR PRECIPITATION

18.  Prior to landing leave MCR on HBB with both shutters CLOSED, then turn of
shutter control unit and switch by disk drive.

D:   After Landing

19.  Remove disks from drives.

20.  Break CB in van.

21.  Break 3 CB's in cargo hold JB6.

22.  Break 3 CB's on flight deck and replace red clips.























                                    - 3 -


                                                                APPENDIX 29
                                                            26 November 1990
ANNEX 1.

Use grey keyboard stowed behind HORACE keyboard to operate MCR.  To start up
MCR follow these steps.
a)   Type D
b)   Input any date you like eg. 1 1 1 (no commas)
c)   After the line of three stars appears type S
d)   Input first delay of 100
e)   Input second delay of 2000
f)   MCR cartwheel should now appear on 5" screen, if not reset terminal and
     start from a) again.
g)   Switch on MCR at rocker switch on shutter control panel the rest of the
     display on the 5" screen should appear.
h)   Type return several times to ensure screen is updating with filter
     status.

ANNEX 2.
TROUBLE-SHOOTING

1.  Sign       HORACE shows "?" by filter status or DRS housekeeping
               (para 506) does not show 00 55 FF AA repeat cycle in last
               column.
    Cause      Filters not rotating properly.
    Treatment  Restart filters using command FE, if problem persists after
               several attempts at a restart then turn OFF MCR and start
               again.
2.  Sign       Mirror in wrong position
    Cause      Usually typing error
    Treatment  Try again
3.  Sign       NOT LOCATED signal on 5" display
    Cause      Mirror is lost between photodiode locators and computer has
               lost track of its position.
    Treatment  Type "S" (search) on command line and MCR will step mirror
               until it has been located by a photodiode.  Themirror is
               located by any single diode through three steps of the motor so
               the command "S" should be repeated again to locate the mirror
               in the middle of the photodiode's beam.  Only in this position
               is the MCR accurately located.
4.  Sign       All temperatures too low (usually only in cold climates eg.
               FINLAND)
    Cause      MCR cold
    Treatment  Make the heater CB in cargo hold JB6 to warm up MCR.  This can
               then be left on.
5.  Sign       MCR ramp not correct or HORACE shows corrupt data
    Cause      The MCR sampling sequence has been corrupted
    Treatment  Turn OFF MCR and restart.








                                    - 4 -
                                                                      
