
                                                                APPENDIX 26
                                                                16 Oct 1989

                       FLUORESCENCE WATER VAPOUR SENSOR

Circuit Breakers Required

Forward Bulkhead:-       MRF MAIN DISTRIBUTION PANEL
                         a) 28V JB3A SUPPLY (one circuit breaker)

Forward Cargo Hold:-     JB 3A
                         a) 28V DC 'FWVS'

Principles of Operation

The instrument measures water vapour in two modes, Absorption and
Fluorescence, the output appearing on a front panel display and the DRS as
calculated dew point along with housekeeping parameters.

Absorption

The Absorption cell utilises a property of UV light at the Lyman Alpha
wavelength (121.8nm) to be absorbed by water vapour.  A fixed optical path
arrangement of source and detector exists, with a reference detector in place
to monitor the lamp output.  The Absorption instrument works over the range
from +30 to -30°C at which point the sensitivity is too low for measurement
purposes.

Fluorescence

The Fluorescence instrument consists of a high power Lyman Alpha source tube,
reference detectors for Lyman Alpha and H Alpha emmission and a
photomultiplier as a Fluorescence detector.  In the presence of water vapour
Lyman Alpha radiation (121.8nm) can excite the water vapour molecules to
fluoresce at 310nm.  This provides a very sensitive system capable of
measuring dew points from -15 to -100°C.  A solenoid valve switches the
airflow on to the Fluorescence instrument when the dew point is below -15°C,
an in built flowmeter records the flow.

Instrument and Data Control

The instrument is controlled by a 6809 microprocessor based system and
operates in a fully automatic mode.  Internal calibrations take place every
ten minutes, the type of calibration is dependant on dew point.  In the
overlap region when both instruments are in operation the Fluorescence
instrument will calibrate the Absorption.  Data are output to the DRS as a
number of parameters, an RS232 port is also available.  Real time calculated
dew points are output at 1Hz as a separate parameter, 8Hz data require ground
based analysis.  An instrument status word is also output to indicate current
operating conditions such as the data source ie Absorption/Fluorescence and
whether the instrument is in a calibration routine.





                                   -1-


                                                                APPENDIX 26
                                                                16 Oct 1989
Front Panel

On the front panel of the instrument a seven segment display shows the number
of minutes to the next calibration, a letter 'c' indicating that the
instrument is in a calibration routine.  The presence of the left hand decimal
point shows that the Fluorescence lamp is on.  An LCD panel meter displays an
eight bit representation of the dew point, (ie to the nearest 1°C).

Pre-Flight

1.   Make circuit Breakers.

2.   Check electrical and pipe connections.

3.   Make sure that the small toggle switch below the seven segment display is
     in the down position.

4.   Switch on the locking toggle switch (On/Off).

5.   The seven segment display will show a number '3'.

6.   Check that the number counts down at one minute intervals and passes
     through a calibration cycle after decrementing past '0', (indicated by a
     letter 'c').

7.   A check should also be made on the DRS for data integrity.

8.   Switch off and prepare for take off.

In-Flight

1.   Switch on instrument as described above.

2.   Obtain permission from the Flight Leader to open the Starboard Air Sample
     Pipe caps (fore and aft).

3.   Operation of this instrument is completely automatic.

CONTROLS AND DISPLAYS

1.   To the left of the seven segment display are two push buttons, the top
     one will cause the instrument to enter a calibration routine, the lower
     button inhibits the next calibration.

2.   The toggle switch should be left in the down position unless the dew
     point is below -25°C and the Fluorescence lamp is not in operation
     (indicated by the lack of the decimal point), please refer to separate
     sheet.  NB  the Fluorescence lamp will not come on unless the following
     conditions are met.

     a)   Five minutes has elapsed since the instrument was powered up.
     b)   There is sufficient airflow through the instrument.
     c)   The dew point is below -25°C.

                                   -2-

                                                                APPENDIX 26
                                                                16 Oct 1989

3.   In normal automatic mode, once the Fluorescence lamp has been turned on,
     it will stay on until the dew point rises above -15°C.

4.   The LCD display gives an 8 bit representation of the real time calculated
     dew point and approximates to the nearest degree, and is for operator
     re-assurance only.

Pre-Landing

1.   Switch off instrument and close air sample pipe caps.

DRS Information

The Fluorescence Water Vapour Sensor is connected to the DRS by a standard MRF
type ASMA link.  The instrument operates in a fully automatic mode and
supplies data when requested by the DRS.  An RS232 serial data output is also
available.

FWVS PARAMETER                DRS PARA                 SAMPLE RATE
                              NUMBER                       (Hz)

Fluorescence Count              126                         8
Lyman Alpha Intensity           127                         8
Absorption Signal               128                         8
Absorption Reference            129                         1
Flowmeter A                     130                         1
Flowmeter B                     131                         1
Pressure                        132                         1
Fl Chamber Thermistor           133                         1
Absorption Thermistor           134                         1
H-Alpha Signal                  135                         1
Fl source run time              136                         1
Absorption run time             137                         1
Calculated Dew point            138                         1
Status Word                     139                         1

STATUS WORD

Bit            Meaning when bit=1

0    1         Frost point calculated from Fluorescence
1    2         Servo Enabled
2    4         CaFl In
3    8         Calibrating

4    10        Servo Active
5    20        Flow meter heater ON
6    40        Discharge 2 (Absorption) ON
7    80        Discharge 1 (Fluorescence) ON

8    100       EHT ON/Valve OPEN
9    200       Cap OPEN
10   400       Control Logic in Lab Test mode
20   800       -----



                                                                APPENDIX 26
                                                                16 Oct 1989


Instructions to switch on the main lamp, when the frost point calculated by
the short path cell is incorrect.

The main lamp should turn on when the frost point calculated using the short
path lamp goes below -15 degrees C, provided there is sufficient airflow
through the instrument and more than five minutes have elapsed since the
instrument was switched on.  The current condition of the main lamp may be
determined by examination of the status word (DRS parameter 139, bit 7=1
indicates lamp on), or by observing the decimal point on the left hand side of
the 7-segment l.e.d displaying the time to the next calibration (the point is
lit when lamp is on).  The calculated frost point is also stored by the DRS as
parameter 138.  This may be converted to degrees C by dividing the decimal
value recorded by 20, and then subtracting 100.

If the stored constant for the short path cell is incorrect, the calculated
frost point may not reach -15 degrees, even in cold, dry air, and hence the
main lamp will not be turned on automatically by the instrument.  In this
case, the main lamp may be switched on manually by moving the toggle switch
below the the 7-segment l.e.d to the upper position.  Provided the frost point
is below -25 degrees C, the display should then show the value calculated
using fluorescence data.  If the instrument is in the overlap region when both
lamps are lit (frost points between -20 and -35 degrees C), then a new value
for the short path constant may be calculated more accurately by pressing the
upper push button next to the frost point display, which will force the
instrument to carry out an immediate self-calibration.  When the instrument is
operating normally and the frost point is calculated to be below the point at
which the main lamp turns on, then the toggle switch should be returned to the
lower position.






















                                        -4-

                                                                      
