                                                               APPENDIX 18
                                                               4 March 1991
                              MANUAL HYGROMETER

Circuit Breakers Required

1.   Co-pilot's MRF DC circuit breaker panel - MRF Main and Ess DC Bus
     a.   MRF Power Control.

2.   Cargo Hold forward bulkhead - MRF Main Distribution Panel
     a.   28V DC  Hygrometer DC
     b.   230V AC Hygrometer AC

Equipment Required

Up to six Dewar flasks with liquid nitrogen
Gloves (personal issue)
Goggles (kept in Instrument Lab)
Spare bulbs (kept in flask stowage box)
Log Forms
Apron
Pre-Flight Checks

1.   Switch DC Power ON
2.   Switch AC power ON
3.   Check display temperature is sensible (~ ambient)
4.   Check thimble is illuminated
5.   Set Intake Actuator to OPEN
6.   Set Flow Control Valves to FLUSH
7.   CHeck Vent Valve is closed
8.   Check pump and flask fitted and secure
9.   Check spare pumps and bulbs available in stowage box
10.  Stow full nitrogen containers
11.  Check that Intake is open and clean
12.  Set Intake Actuator to CLOSED
13.  Switch DC Power OFF
14.  Switch AC Power OFF

In Flight

1.   Switch DC Power ON
2.   Switch AC Power ON
3.   Check flow control valves to FLUSH
4.   When clear of cloud set Intake Actuator to OPEN
5.   Set Flow Control Valves to SAMPLE
6.   Take readings as required adhering strictly to the following procedure:-

a)   Cool the surface until a small visible deposit is obtained and observe

     the display temp.

Safety:  During operation gloves, goggles and the apron are to be used when
handling liquid nitrogen.  The aircraft Captain should be informed (through
the Flight Leader) prior to pouring liquid nitrogen.  Observers should also
wear suitable shoes, ie. flying boots.

                                        -1-


                                                               APPENDIX 18
                                                               4 March 1991


b)   Allow the indicated temp to increase by a few degrees and adjust  

     pumping rate to maintain constant temp.  Inspect deposit after a few

     seconds and observe if increasing steady or decreasing.  Repeat if

     necessary by increasing indicated temp in small steps until a decreasing

     deposit is observed.  Note temp.

c)   Decrease the temp in steps by adjusting the pumping rate until deposit is

     observed to be increasing.  Note the temp.


d)   Repeat b) and c) (without letting deposit evaporate completely when

     working at low (sub zero) temperatures) until readings are within limits

     in Table 1 below.  The dew/frost point is the mean of the best readings

     obtained in b) and c).


     Between 0 and -20oC either super-cooled water or ice may be formed and a

     note should be made as to which deposit is observed.  The General Eastern

     Hygrometer is similarly affected (but there is no way of knowing whether 

     ice or water is present); hence discrepancies of up to 2oC (frost-point 

     warmer) may arise between simultaneous readings of the two hygrometers.



     Discrimination between water or ice deposit is best learnt from

     experience.  A water deposit is misty and somewhat grey in appearance

     whereas ice is usually in the form of distinct white crystals.


     Only that part of the thimble on which the incoming air impinges should

     be used for observations as odd ice crystals can remain unaffected near

     the thimble edge.  This area being less effectively scavenged.


                                        -2-



                                                               APPENDIX 18
                                                               14 March 1991

     The time taken for an observation varies greatly with the skill of the 

     observer, and the frost point to be observed.  Table 1 shows the sort of 

     time required to determine whether a deposit is changing or not and the 

     difference between the temperatures b) and c) which can be obtained.  

     These represent favourable figures but sometimes the work can be speeded 

     up if a larger separation between the temperatures b) and c) is accepted.

                                   Table 1

          Td or Tf                 Time                Temp (c) - Temp (b)

     Above 0 C                     10 sec                       0.2 C
     -10 C dew deposit             20 sec                       0.5 C
     - 10 C ice                    30 sec                       0.5 C
     -50 C                          1 min                       1.0 C
     -80 C                          4 min                       2.0 C

7.   When measurement is complete return Flow Control Valves to FLUSH.
8.   When flight in cloud is expected keep intake closed (except when
     hygrometer is required as an indicator of the presence of ice crystal
     cloud).
9.   If it is necessary to remove the hygrometer head in flight
     a)   set Flow Control Valves to FLUSH
     b)   open Vent Valve (to bring hygrometer chamber to cabin pressure)
     c)   unscrew two clamp nuts and lift off head
     d)   take care not to drop the glass ellipse which may adhere to under
          face of head.  Ensure ellipse is correctly fitted (small chamfer
          down) before replacing head.

          Refitting is the reverse of this procedure.  Do not overtighten the
          Vent Valve which should only be finger-tight.

10.  If the surface of the thimble becomes dirty it may be very gently cleaned
     (after  removing the head) using either a lens tissue or tape head
     cleaning cloth.  Use only very gentle pressure to avoid scratching the
     anodised surface.










                                        -3-


                                                         
